Hadith Narrated by: Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Hadith: 

     I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, "The reward of deeds depends upon the 
     intentions and every person will get the reward according to what he 
     has intended. So whoever emigrated for worldly benefits or for a woman
     to marry, his emigration was for what he emigrated for."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Aisha:
Hadith: 

     (the mother of the faithful believers) Al-Harith bin Hisham asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! How is the Divine Inspiration revealed to you?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "Sometimes it is (revealed) like the ringing of a bell, this form of Inspiration is the hardest of all and then this state passes off after I have grasped what is inspired. Sometimes the Angel comes in the form of a man and talks to me and I grasp whatever he says." 'Aisha added: Verily I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) being inspired divinely on a very cold day and noticed the sweat dropping from his forehead (as the Inspiration was over).

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 2

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated 'Aisha (the mother of the faithful believers):
Hadith: The commencement of the Divine Inspiration to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was in the form of good dreams which came true like bright daylight, and then the love of seclusion was bestowed upon him. He used to go in seclusion in the cave of Hira where he used to worship (Allah alone) continuously for many days before his desire to see his family. He used to take with him the journey food for the stay and then come back to (his wife) Khadija to take his food likewise again till suddenly the Truth descended upon him while he was in the cave of Hira. The angel came to him and asked him to read. The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "I do not know how to read." The Prophet (ﷺ) added, "The angel caught me (forcefully) and pressed me so hard that I could not bear it any more. He then released me and again asked me to read and I replied, 'I do not know how to read.' Thereupon he caught me again and pressed me a second time till I could not bear it any more. He then released me and again asked me to read but again I replied, 'I do not know how to read (or what shall I read)?' Thereupon he caught me for the third time and pressed me, and then released me and said, 'Read in the name of your Lord, who has created (all that exists), created man from a clot. Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous." (96.1, 96.2, 96.3) Then Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) returned with the Inspiration and with his heart beating severely. Then he went to Khadija bint Khuwailid and said, "Cover me! Cover me!" They covered him till his fear was over and after that he told her everything that had happened and said, "I fear that something may happen to me." Khadija replied, "Never! By Allah, Allah will never disgrace you. You keep good relations with your kith and kin, help the poor and the destitute, serve your guests generously and assist the deserving calamity-afflicted ones."  Khadija then accompanied him to her cousin Waraqa bin Naufal bin Asad bin 'Abdul 'Uzza, who, during the pre-Islamic Period became a Christian and used to write the writing with Hebrew letters. He would write from the Gospel in Hebrew as much as Allah wished him to write. He was an old man and had lost his eyesight. Khadija said to Waraqa, "Listen to the story of your nephew, O my cousin!" Waraqa asked, "O my nephew! What have you seen?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) described whatever he had seen. Waraqa said, "This is the same one who keeps the secrets (angel Gabriel) whom Allah had sent to Moses. I wish I were young and could live up to the time when your people would turn you out." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) asked, "Will they drive me out?" Waraqa replied in the affirmative and said, "Anyone (man) who came with something similar to what you have brought was treated with hostility; and if I should remain alive till the day when you will be turned out then I would support you strongly." But after a few days Waraqa died and the Divine Inspiration was also paused for a while.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 3

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari (while talking about the period of pause in revelation) reporting the speech of the Prophet:
Hadith: "While I was walking, all of a sudden I heard a voice from the sky. I looked up and saw the same angel who had visited me at the cave of Hira' sitting on a chair between the sky and the earth. I got afraid of him and came back home and said, 'Wrap me (in blankets).' And then Allah revealed the following Holy Verses (of Quran):  'O you (i.e. Muhammad)! wrapped up in garments!' Arise and warn (the people against Allah's Punishment),... up to 'and desert the idols.' (74.1-5) After this the revelation started coming strongly, frequently and regularly."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 4

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Hadith: 

     Ibn 'Abbas in the explanation of the statement of Allah "Move not your tongue concerning (the Quran) to make haste therewith." (75.16) said "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to bear the revelation with great trouble and used to move his lips (quickly) with the Inspiration." Ibn 'Abbas moved his lips saying, "I am moving my lips in front of you as Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to move his." Said moved his lips saying: "I am moving my lips, as I saw Ibn 'Abbas moving his." Ibn 'Abbas added, "So Allah revealed 'Move not your tongue concerning (the Qur'an) to make haste therewith. It is for Us to collect it and to give you (O Muhammad) the ability to recite it (the Quran)' (75.16-17) which means that Allah will make him (the Prophet) remember the portion of the Qur'an which was revealed at that time by heart and recite it. The statement of Allah: 'And when we have recited it to you (O Muhammad through Gabriel) then you follow its (Quran) recital' (75.18) means 'listen to it and be silent.' Then it is for Us (Allah) to make it clear to you' (75.19) means 'Then it is (for Allah) to make you recite it (and its meaning will be clear by itself through your tongue). Afterwards, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to listen to Gabriel whenever he came and after his departure he used to recite it as Gabriel had recited it."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 5

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was the most generous of all the people, and he used 
     to reach the peak in generosity in the month of Ramadan when Gabriel 
     met him. Gabriel used to meet him every night of Ramadan to teach him 
     the Qur'an. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was the most generous person, even more 
     generous than the strong uncontrollable wind (in readiness and haste 
     to do charitable deeds).

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 6

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Hadith: 

     Abu Sufyan bin Harb informed me that Heraclius had sent a messenger to
     him while he had been accompanying a caravan from Quraish. They were 
     merchants doing business in Sham (Syria, Palestine, Lebanon and 
     Jordan), at the time when Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) had truce with Abu Sufyan 
     and Quraish infidels. So Abu Sufyan and his companions went to 
     Heraclius at Ilya (Jerusalem). Heraclius called them in the court and 
     he had all the senior Roman dignitaries around him. He called for his 
     translator who, translating Heraclius's question said to them, "Who 
     amongst you is closely related to that man who claims to be a 
     Prophet?" Abu Sufyan replied, "I am the nearest relative to him 
     (amongst the group)."


     Heraclius said, "Bring him (Abu Sufyan) close to me and make his 
     companions stand behind him." Abu Sufyan added, Heraclius told his 
     translator to tell my companions that he wanted to put some questions 
     to me regarding that man (The Prophet) and that if I told a lie they 
     (my companions) should contradict me." Abu Sufyan added, "By Allah! 
     Had I not been afraid of my companions labeling me a liar, I would not
     have spoken the truth about the Prophet. The first question he asked 
     me about him was:


     'What is his family status amongst you?' 


     I replied, 'He belongs to a good (noble) family amongst us.' 


     Heraclius further asked, 'Has anybody amongst you ever claimed the 
     same (i.e. to be a Prophet) before him?'


     I replied, 'No.'


     He said, 'Was anybody amongst his ancestors a king?'


     I replied, 'No.'


     Heraclius asked, 'Do the nobles or the poor follow him?'


     I replied, 'It is the poor who follow him.'


     He said, 'Are his followers increasing decreasing (day by day)?'


     I replied, 'They are increasing.'


     He then asked, 'Does anybody amongst those who embrace his religion 
     become displeased and renounce the religion afterwards?'


     I replied, 'No.'


     Heraclius said, 'Have you ever accused him of telling lies before his 
     claim (to be a Prophet)?'


     I replied, 'No. '


     Heraclius said, 'Does he break his promises?'


     I replied, 'No. We are at truce with him but we do not know what he 
     will do in it.' I could not find opportunity to say anything against 
     him except that.


     Heraclius asked, 'Have you ever had a war with him?'


     I replied, 'Yes.'


     Then he said, 'What was the outcome of the battles?'


     I replied, 'Sometimes he was victorious and sometimes we.'


     Heraclius said, 'What does he order you to do?'


     I said, 'He tells us to worship Allah and Allah alone and not to 
     worship anything along with Him, and to renounce all that our 
     ancestors had said. He orders us to pray, to speak the truth, to be 
     chaste and to keep good relations with our Kith and kin.'


     Heraclius asked the translator to convey to me the following, I asked 
     you about his family and your reply was that he belonged to a very 
     noble family. In fact all the Apostles come from noble families 
     amongst their respective peoples. I questioned you whether anybody 
     else amongst you claimed such a thing, your reply was in the negative.
     If the answer had been in the affirmative, I would have thought that 
     this man was following the previous man's statement. Then I asked you 
     whether anyone of his ancestors was a king. Your reply was in the 
     negative, and if it had been in the affirmative, I would have thought 
     that this man wanted to take back his ancestral kingdom.


     I further asked whether he was ever accused of telling lies before he 
     said what he said, and your reply was in the negative. So I wondered 
     how a person who does not tell a lie about others could ever tell a 
     lie about Allah. I, then asked you whether the rich people followed 
     him or the poor. You replied that it was the poor who followed him. 
     And in fact all the Apostle have been followed by this very class of 
     people. Then I asked you whether his followers were increasing or 
     decreasing. You replied that they were increasing, and in fact this is
     the way of true faith, till it is complete in all respects. I further 
     asked you whether there was anybody, who, after embracing his 
     religion, became displeased and discarded his religion. Your reply was
     in the negative, and in fact this is (the sign of) true faith, when 
     its delight enters the hearts and mixes with them completely. I asked 
     you whether he had ever betrayed. You replied in the negative and 
     likewise the Apostles never betray. Then I asked you what he ordered 
     you to do. You replied that he ordered you to worship Allah and Allah 
     alone and not to worship any thing along with Him and forbade you to 
     worship idols and ordered you to pray, to speak the truth and to be 
     chaste. If what you have said is true, he will very soon occupy this 
     place underneath my feet and I knew it (from the scriptures) that he 
     was going to appear but I did not know that he would be from you, and 
     if I could reach him definitely, I would go immediately to meet him 
     and if I were with him, I would certainly wash his feet.' Heraclius 
     then asked for the letter addressed by Allah's Apostle


     which was delivered by Dihya to the Governor of Busra, who forwarded 
     it to Heraclius to read. The contents of the letter were as follows: 
     "In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful (This letter is) 
     from Muhammad the slave of Allah and His Apostle to Heraclius the 
     ruler of Byzantine. Peace be upon him, who follows the right path. 
     Furthermore I invite you to Islam, and if you become a Muslim you will
     be safe, and Allah will double your reward, and if you reject this 
     invitation of Islam you will be committing a sin of
     Arisiyin (tillers, farmers i.e. your people). And  (Allah's Statement:)


     'O people of the scripture! Come to a word common to you and us that 
     we worship none but Allah and that we associate nothing in worship 
     with Him, and that none of us shall take others as Lords beside Allah.
     Then, if they turn away, say: Bear witness that we are Muslims (those 
     who have surrendered to Allah).' (3:64).


     Abu Sufyan then added, "When Heraclius had finished his speech and had
     read the letter, there was a great hue and cry in the Royal Court. So 
     we were turned out of the court. I told my companions that the 
     question of Ibn-Abi-Kabsha) (the Prophet (ﷺ) Muhammad) has become so 
     prominent that even the King of Bani Al-Asfar (Byzantine) is afraid of
     him. Then I started to become sure that he (the Prophet) would be the 
     conqueror in the near future till I embraced Islam (i.e. Allah guided 
     me to it)."


     The sub narrator adds, "Ibn An-Natur was the Governor of llya' 
     (Jerusalem) and Heraclius was the head of the Christians of Sham. Ibn 
     An-Natur narrates that once while Heraclius was visiting ilya' 
     (Jerusalem), he got up in the morning with a sad mood. Some of his 
     priests asked him why he was in that mood? Heraclius was a foreteller 
     and an astrologer. He replied, 'At night when I looked at the stars, I
     saw that the leader of those who practice circumcision had appeared 
     (become the conqueror). Who are they who practice circumcision?' The 
     people replied, 'Except the Jews nobody practices circumcision, so you
     should not be afraid of them (Jews).


     'Just Issue orders to kill every Jew present in the country.'


     While they were discussing it, a messenger sent by the king of Ghassan
     to convey the news of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) to Heraclius was brought in. 
     Having heard the news, he (Heraclius) ordered the people to go and see
     whether the messenger of Ghassan was circumcised. The people, after 
     seeing him, told Heraclius that he was circumcised. Heraclius then 
     asked him about the Arabs. The messenger replied, 'Arabs also practice
     circumcision.'


     (After hearing that) Heraclius remarked that sovereignty of the 'Arabs
     had appeared. Heraclius then wrote a letter to his friend in Rome who 
     was as good as Heraclius in knowledge. Heraclius then left for Homs. 
     (a town in Syrian and stayed there till he received the reply of his 
     letter from his friend who agreed with him in his opinion about the 
     emergence of the Prophet (ﷺ) and the fact that he was a Prophet. On that 
     Heraclius invited all the heads of the Byzantines to assemble in his 
     palace at Homs. When they assembled, he ordered that all the doors of 
     his palace be closed. Then he came out and said, 'O Byzantines! If 
     success is your desire and if you seek right guidance and want your 
     empire to remain then give a pledge of allegiance to this Prophet 
     (i.e. embrace Islam).'


     (On hearing the views of Heraclius) the people ran towards the gates 
     of the palace like onagers but found the doors closed. Heraclius 
     realized their hatred towards Islam and when he lost the hope of their
     embracing Islam, he ordered that they should be brought back in 
     audience.


     (When they returned) he said, 'What already said was just to test the 
     strength of your conviction and I have seen it.' The people prostrated
     before him and became pleased with him, and this was the end of 
     Heraclius's story (in connection with his faith).

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 7

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said: Islam is based on (the following) five 
     (principles):


     1. To testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and 
     Muhammad is Allah's Messenger (ﷺ).


     2. To offer the (compulsory congregational) prayers dutifully and 
     perfectly.


     3. To pay Zakat (i.e. obligatory charity) .


     4. To perform Hajj. (i.e. Pilgrimage to Mecca)


     5. To observe fast during the month of Ramadan.

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 8

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Faith (Belief) consists of more than sixty branches
     (i.e. parts). And Haya (This term "Haya" covers a large number of 
     concepts which are to be taken together; amongst them are self 
     respect, modesty, bashfulness, and scruple, etc.) is a part of 
     faith."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 9

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "A Muslim is the one who avoids harming Muslims with
     his tongue and hands. And a Muhajir (emigrant) is the one who gives up
     (abandons) all what Allah has forbidden."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 10

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: 

     Some people asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), "Whose Islam is the best? i.e. (Who
     is a very good Muslim)?" He replied, "One who avoids harming the 
     Muslims with his tongue and hands."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 11

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Hadith: 

     A man asked the Prophet (ﷺ) , "What sort of deeds or (what qualities of) 
     Islam are good?" The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, 'To feed (the poor) and greet 
     those whom you know and those whom you do not Know (See 
     Hadith No. 27).

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 12

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Anas:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "None of you will have faith till he wishes for his 
     (Muslim) brother what he likes for himself."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 13

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is, none of you 
     will have faith till he loves me more than his father and his 
     children."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 14

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Anas:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said "None of you will have faith till he loves me more 
     than his father, his children and all mankind."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 15

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Anas:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever possesses the following three qualities 
     will have the sweetness (delight) of faith:


     1. The one to whom Allah and His Apostle becomes dearer than anything 
     else.


     2. Who loves a person and he loves him only for Allah's sake.


     3. Who hates to revert to Atheism (disbelief) as he hates to be thrown
     into the fire."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 16

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Anas:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Love for the Ansar is a sign of faith and hatred 
     for the Ansar is a sign of hypocrisy."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 17

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
Hadith: 

     who took part in the battle of Badr and was a Naqib (a person heading 
     a group of six persons), on the night of Al-'Aqaba pledge: Allah's 
     Apostle said while a group of his companions were around him, "Swear 
     allegiance to me for:


     1. Not to join anything in worship along with Allah.


     2. Not to steal.


     3. Not to commit illegal sexual intercourse.


     4. Not to kill your children.


     5. Not to accuse an innocent person (to spread such an accusation 
     among people).


     6. Not to be disobedient (when ordered) to do good deed."


     The Prophet (ﷺ) added: "Whoever among you fulfills his pledge will be 
     rewarded by Allah. And whoever indulges in any one of them (except the
     ascription of partners to Allah) and gets the punishment in this 
     world, that punishment will be an expiation for that sin. And if one 
     indulges in any of them, and Allah conceals his sin, it is up to Him 
     to forgive or punish him (in the Hereafter)." 'Ubada bin As-Samit 
     added: "So we swore allegiance for these." (points to Allah's 
     Apostle)

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 18

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "A time will soon come when the best property of a Muslim will be sheep which he will take on the top of mountains and the places of rainfall (valleys) so as to flee with his religion from afflictions."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 19

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Aisha:
Hadith: 

     Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ordered the Muslims to do something, he used 
     to order them deeds which were easy for them to do, (according to 
     their strength and endurance). They said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! We are not 
     like you. Allah  has forgiven your past and future sins." So Allah's 
     Apostle became angry and it was apparent on his face. He said, "I am 
     the most Allah fearing, and know Allah better than all of you do."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 20

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Anas:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever possesses the following three qualities 
     will taste the sweetness of faith:


     1. The one to whom Allah and His Apostle become dearer than anything 
     else.


     2. Who loves a person and he loves him only for Allah's sake.


     3. Who hates to revert to disbelief (Atheism) after Allah has brought 
     (saved) him out from it, as he hates to be thrown in fire."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 21

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When the people of Paradise will enter Paradise and
     the people of Hell will go to Hell, Allah will order those who have 
     had faith equal to the weight of a grain of mustard seed to be taken 
     out from Hell. So they will be taken out but (by then) they will be 
     blackened (charred). Then they will be put in the river of Haya' 
     (rain) or Hayat (life) (the Narrator is in doubt as to which is the 
     right term), and they will revive like a grain that grows near the 
     bank of a flood channel. Don't you see that it comes out yellow and 
     twisted"

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 22

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "While I was sleeping I saw (in a dream) some 
     people wearing shirts of which some were reaching up to the breasts 
     only while others were even shorter than that. Umar bin Al-Khattab was
     shown wearing a shirt that he was dragging." The people asked, "How 
     did you interpret it? (What is its interpretation) O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)?"
     He (the Prophet (ﷺ) ) replied, "It is the Religion."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 23

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar):
Hadith: 

     Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) passed by an Ansari (man) who was admonishing
     his brother regarding Haya'. On that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Leave him 
     as Haya' is a part of faith." (See Hadith 9)

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 24

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said: "I have been ordered (by Allah) to fight against
     the people until they testify that none has the right to be worshipped
     but Allah and that Muhammad is Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), and offer the prayers 
     perfectly and give the obligatory charity, so if they perform that, 
     then they save their lives and property from me except for Islamic laws
     and then their reckoning (accounts) will be done by Allah."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 25

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was asked, "What is the best deed?" He replied, "To 
     believe in Allah and His Apostle (Muhammad). The questioner then 
     asked, "What is the next (in goodness)? He replied, "To participate in
     Jihad (religious fighting) in Allah's Cause." The questioner again 
     asked, "What is the next (in goodness)?" He replied, "To perform Hajj 
     (Pilgrim age to Mecca) 'Mubrur, (which is accepted by Allah and is 
     performed with the intention of seeking Allah's pleasure only and not 
     to show off and without committing a sin and in accordance with the 
     traditions of the Prophet)."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 26

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Sa'd:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) distributed (Zakat) amongst (a group of) people while 
     I was sitting there but Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) left a man whom I thought the 
     best of the lot. I asked, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Why have you left that 
     person? By Allah I regard him as a faithful believer." The Prophet (ﷺ) 
     commented: "Or merely a Muslim." I remained quiet for a while, but 
     could not help repeating my question because of what I knew about him.
     And then asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), "Why have you left so and so? By 
     Allah! He is a faithful believer." The Prophet (ﷺ) again said, "Or merely 
     a Muslim." And I could not help repeating my question because of what 
     I knew about him. Then the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "O Sa'd! I give to a person 
     while another is dearer to me, for fear that he might be thrown on his
     face in the Fire by Allah."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 27

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Hadith: 

     A person asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) . "What (sort of) deeds in or (what 
     qualities of) Islam are good?" He replied, "To feed (the poor) and 
     greet those whom you know and those whom you don't know."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 28

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said: "I was shown the Hell-fire and that the majority of 
     its dwellers were women who were ungrateful." It was asked, "Do they 
     disbelieve in Allah?" (or are they ungrateful to Allah?) He replied, 
     "They are ungrateful to their husbands and are ungrateful for the 
     favors and the good (charitable deeds) done to them. If you have 
     always been good (benevolent) to one of them and then she sees 
     something in you (not of her liking), she will say, 'I have never 
     received any good from you."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 29

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Al-Ma'rur:
Hadith: 

     At Ar-Rabadha I met Abu Dhar who was wearing a cloak, and his slave, 
     too, was wearing a similar one. I asked about the reason for it. He 
     replied, "I abused a person by calling his mother with bad names." The
     Prophet said to me, 'O Abu Dhar! Did you abuse him by calling his 
     mother with bad names You still have some characteristics of 
     ignorance. Your slaves are your brothers and Allah has put them under 
     your command. So whoever has a brother under his command should feed 
     him of what he eats and dress him of what he wears. Do not ask them 
     (slaves) to do things beyond their capacity (power) and if you do so, 
     then help them.' "

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 30

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Al-Ahnaf bin Qais:
Hadith: 

     While I was going to help this man ('Ali Ibn Abi Talib), Abu Bakra met
     me and asked, "Where are you going?" I replied, "I am going to help 
     that person." He said, "Go back for I have heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
     saying, 'When two Muslims fight (meet) each other with their swords, 
     both the murderer as well as the murdered will go to the Hell-fire.' I
     said, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! It is all right for the murderer but what 
     about the murdered one?' Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "He surely had the 
     intention to kill his companion."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 31

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah:
Hadith: 

     When the following Verse was revealed: "It is those who believe and 
     confuse not their belief with wrong (worshipping others besides 
     Allah.)" (6:83), the companions of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) asked, "Who is 
     amongst us who had not done injustice (wrong)?" Allah revealed: "No 
     doubt, joining others in worship with Allah is a great injustice 
     (wrong) indeed." (31.13)

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 32

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The signs of a hypocrite are three:


     1. Whenever he speaks, he tells a lie.


     2. Whenever he promises, he always breaks it (his promise ).


     3. If you trust him, he proves to be dishonest. (If you keep something
     as a trust with him, he will not return it.)"

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 33

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever has the following four (characteristics) 
     will be a pure hypocrite and whoever has one of the following four 
     characteristics will have one characteristic of hypocrisy unless and 
     until he gives it up.


     1. Whenever he is entrusted, he betrays.


     2. Whenever he speaks, he tells a lie.


     3. Whenever he makes a covenant, he proves treacherous.


     4. Whenever he quarrels, he behaves in a very imprudent, evil and 
     insulting manner."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 34

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whoever establishes the prayers on the night of
     Qadr out of sincere faith and hoping to attain Allah's rewards (not to
     show off) then all his past sins will be forgiven."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 35

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The person who participates in (Holy battles) in 
     Allah's cause and nothing compels him to do so except belief in Allah 
     and His Apostles, will be recompensed by Allah either with a reward, 
     or booty (if he survives) or will be admitted to Paradise (if he is 
     killed in the battle as a martyr). Had I not found it difficult for my
     followers, then I would not remain behind any sariya going for Jihad 
     and I would have loved to be martyred in Allah's cause and then made 
     alive, and then martyred and then made alive, and then again martyred 
     in His cause."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 36

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said: "Whoever establishes prayers during the nights 
     of Ramadan faithfully out of sincere faith and hoping to attain 
     Allah's rewards (not for showing off), all his past sins will be 
     forgiven."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 37

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whoever observes fasts during the month of 
     Ramadan out of sincere faith, and hoping to attain Allah's rewards, 
     then all his past sins will be forgiven."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 38

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Religion is very easy and whoever overburdens 
     himself in his religion will not be able to continue in that way. So 
     you should not be extremists, but try to be near to perfection and 
     receive the good tidings that you will be rewarded; and gain strength 
     by worshipping in the mornings, the afternoons, and during the last hours of the nights." (See Fath-ul-Bari, Page 
     102, Vol 1).

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 39

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' (bin 'Azib):
Hadith: 

     When the Prophet (ﷺ) came to Medina, he stayed first with his grandfathers
     or maternal uncles from Ansar. He offered his prayers facing 
     Baitul-Maqdis (Jerusalem) for sixteen or seventeen months, but he 
     wished that he could pray facing the Ka'ba (at Mecca). The first 
     prayer which he offered facing the Ka'ba was the 'Asr prayer in the 
     company of some people. Then one of those who had offered that prayer 
     with him came out and passed by some people in a mosque who were 
     bowing during their prayers (facing Jerusalem). He said addressing 
     them, "By Allah, I testify that I have prayed with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
     facing Mecca (Ka'ba).' Hearing that, those people changed their 
     direction towards the Ka'ba immediately. Jews and the people of the 
     scriptures used to be pleased to see the Prophet (ﷺ) facing Jerusalem in 
     prayers but when he changed his direction towards the Ka'ba, during 
     the prayers, they disapproved of it.


     Al-Bara' added, "Before we changed our direction towards the Ka'ba 
     (Mecca) in prayers, some Muslims had died or had been killed and we 
     did not know what to say about them (regarding their prayers.) Allah 
     then revealed: And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be 
     lost (i.e. the prayers of those Muslims were valid).' " (2:143).

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 40

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Abu Sa'id Al Khudri:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If a person embraces Islam sincerely, then Allah shall forgive all his past sins, and after that starts the settlement of accounts, the reward of his good deeds will be ten times to seven hundred times for each good deed and one evil deed will be recorded as it is unless Allah forgives it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 41

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If any one of you improve (follows strictly) 
     his Islamic religion then his good deeds will be rewarded ten times to
     seven hundred times for each good deed and a bad deed will be recorded
     as it is."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 42

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Aisha:
Hadith: 

     Once the Prophet (ﷺ) came while a woman was sitting with me. He said, "Who
     is she?" I replied, "She is so and so," and told him about her 
     (excessive) praying. He said disapprovingly, "Do (good) deeds which is
     within your capacity (without being overtaxed) as Allah does not get 
     tired (of giving rewards) but (surely) you will get tired and the best
     deed (act of Worship) in the sight of Allah is that which is done 
     regularly."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 43

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Anas:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever said "None has the right to be worshipped 
     but Allah and has in his heart good (faith) equal to the weight of a 
     barley grain will be taken out of Hell. And whoever said: "None has 
     the right to be worshipped but Allah and has in his heart good (faith)
     equal to the weight of a wheat grain will be taken out of Hell. And 
     whoever said, "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah and has 
     in his heart good (faith) equal to the weight of an atom will be taken
     out of Hell."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 44

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Hadith: 

     Once a Jew said to me, "O the chief of believers! There is a verse in 
     your Holy Book Which is read by all of you (Muslims), and had it been 
     revealed to us, we would have taken that day (on which it was revealed
     as a day of celebration." 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked, "Which is that 
     verse?" The Jew replied, "This day I have perfected your religion For 
     you, completed My favor upon you, And have chosen for you Islam as 
     your religion." (5:3) 'Umar replied,"No doubt, we know when and where 
     this verse was revealed to the Prophet. It was Friday and the Prophet (ﷺ) 
     was standing at 'Arafat (i.e. the Day of Hajj)"

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 45

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaidullah:
Hadith: 

     A man from Najd with unkempt hair came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and we heard
     his loud voice but could not understand what he was saying, till he 
     came near and then we came to know that he was asking about Islam. 
     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "You have to offer prayers perfectly five times 
     in a day and night (24 hours)." The man asked, "Is there any more 
     (praying)?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "No, but if you want to offer the
     Nawafil prayers (you can)." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) further said to him: "You 
     have to observe fasts during the month of Ramadan." The man asked, 
     "Is there any more fasting?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "No, but if you 
     want to observe the Nawafil fasts (you can.)" Then Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
     further said to him, "You have to pay the Zakat (obligatory charity)."
     The man asked, "Is there any thing other than the Zakat for me to 
     pay?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "No, unless you want to give alms of 
     your own." And then that man retreated saying, "By Allah! I will 
     neither do less nor more than this." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If what he
     said is true, then he will be successful (i.e. he will be granted 
     Paradise)."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 46

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "(A believer) who accompanies the funeral 
     procession of a Muslim out of sincere faith and hoping to attain 
     Allah's reward and remains with it till the funeral prayer is offered 
     and the burial ceremonies are over, he will return with a reward of 
     two Qirats. Each Qirat is like the size of the (Mount) Uhud. He who 
     offers the funeral prayer only and returns before the burial, will 
     return with the reward of one Qirat only."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 47

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Abusing a Muslim is Fusuq (an evil doing) and 
     killing him is Kufr (disbelief)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 48

Hadith Narrated by: 

Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
Hadith: "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went out to inform the people about the (date of the)
     night of decree (Al-Qadr) but there happened a quarrel between two 
     Muslim men. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I came out to inform you about (the 
     date of) the night of Al-Qadr, but as so and so and so and so 
     quarrelled, its knowledge was taken away (I forgot it) and maybe it 
     was better for you. Now look for it in the 7th, the 9th and the 5th 
     (of the last 10 nights of the month of Ramadan)."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 49

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     One day while the Prophet (ﷺ) was sitting in the company of some people, 
     (The angel) Gabriel came and asked, "What is faith?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
     replied, 'Faith is to believe in Allah, His angels, (the) meeting with
     Him, His Apostles, and to believe in Resurrection." Then he further 
     asked, "What is Islam?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "To worship Allah 
     Alone and none else, to offer prayers perfectly to pay the compulsory 
     charity (Zakat) and to observe fasts during the month of Ramadan."  
     Then he further asked, "What is Ihsan (perfection)?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
     replied, "To worship Allah as if you see Him, and if you cannot 
     achieve this state of devotion then you must consider that He is 
     looking at you." Then he further asked, "When will the Hour be 
     established?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "The answerer has no better 
     knowledge than the questioner. But I will inform you about its 
     portents.


     1. When a slave (lady) gives birth to her master.


     2. When the shepherds of black camels start boasting and competing 
     with others in the construction of higher buildings. And the Hour is 
     one of five things which nobody knows except Allah.


     The Prophet (ﷺ) then recited: "Verily, with Allah (Alone) is the knowledge
     of the Hour--." (31. 34) Then that man (Gabriel) left and the Prophet (ﷺ) 
     asked his companions to call him back, but they could not see him. 
     Then the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "That was Gabriel who came to teach the people 
     their religion." Abu 'Abdullah said: He (the Prophet) considered all 
     that as a part of faith.

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 50

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Hadith: 

     I was informed by Abu Sufyan that Heraclius said to him, "I asked you 
     whether they (followers of Muhammad) were increasing or decreasing. 
     You replied that they were increasing. And in fact, this is the way of
     true Faith till it is complete in all respects. I further asked you 
     whether there was anybody, who, after embracing his (the Prophets) 
     religion (Islam) became displeased and discarded it. You replied in 
     the negative, and in fact, this is (a sign of) true faith. When its 
     delight enters the heart and mixes with them completely, nobody can be
     displeased with it."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 51

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
Hadith: 

     I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, 'Both legal and illegal things are 
     evident but in between them there are doubtful (suspicious) things and
     most of the people have no knowledge about them. So whoever saves 
     himself from these suspicious things saves his religion and his honor.
     And whoever indulges in these suspicious things is like a shepherd who
     grazes (his animals) near the Hima (private pasture) of someone else 
     and at any moment he is liable to get in it. (O people!) Beware! Every
     king has a Hima and the Hima of Allah on the earth is His illegal 
     (forbidden) things. Beware! There is a piece of flesh in the body if 
     it becomes good (reformed) the whole body becomes good but if it gets 
     spoilt the whole body gets spoilt and that is the heart.

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 52

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Jamra:
Hadith: 

     I used to sit with Ibn 'Abbas and he made me sit on his sitting place.
     He requested me to stay with him in order that he might give me a 
     share from his property. So I stayed with him for two months. Once he 
     told (me) that when the delegation of the tribe of 'Abdul Qais came to
     the Prophet, the Prophet (ﷺ) asked them, "Who are the people (i.e. you)? 
     (Or) who are the delegate?" They replied, "We are from the tribe of 
     Rabi'a." Then the Prophet (ﷺ) said to them, "Welcome! O people (or O 
     delegation of 'Abdul Qais)! Neither will you have disgrace nor will 
     you regret." They said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! We cannot come to you 
     except in the sacred month and there is the infidel tribe of Mudar 
     intervening between you and us. So please order us to do something 
     good (religious deeds) so that we may inform our people whom we have 
     left behind (at home), and that we may enter Paradise (by acting on 
     them)." Then they asked about drinks (what is legal and what is 
     illegal). The Prophet (ﷺ) ordered them to do four things and forbade them 
     from four things. He ordered them to believe in Allah Alone and asked 
     them, "Do you know what is meant by believing in Allah Alone?" They 
     replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." Thereupon the Prophet (ﷺ) 
     said, "It means:


     1. To testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and 
     Muhammad is Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). 


     2. To offer prayers perfectly


     3. To pay the Zakat (obligatory charity) 


     4. To observe fast during the month of Ramadan.


     5. And to pay Al-Khumus (one fifth of the booty to be given in Allah's
     Cause).


     Then he forbade them four things, namely, Hantam, Dubba,' Naqir Ann 
     Muzaffat or Muqaiyar; (These were the names of pots in which Alcoholic
     drinks were prepared) (The Prophet (ﷺ) mentioned the container of wine and
     he meant the wine itself). The Prophet (ﷺ) further said (to them): 
     "Memorize them (these instructions) and convey them to the people whom
     you have left behind."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 53

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "The reward of deeds depends upon the intention 
     and every person will get the reward according to what he has 
     intended. So whoever emigrated for Allah and His Apostle, then his 
     emigration was for Allah and His Apostle. And whoever emigrated for 
     worldly benefits or for a woman to marry, his emigration was for what 
     he emigrated for."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 54

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "If a man spends on his family (with the intention 
     of having a reward from Allah) sincerely for Allah's sake then it is a
     (kind of) alms-giving in reward for him.

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 55

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "You will be rewarded for whatever you spend for
     Allah's sake even if it were a morsel which you put in your wife's 
     mouth."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 56

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Jarir bin Abdullah:
Hadith: 

     I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) for the following:


     1. offer prayers perfectly 


     2. pay the Zakat (obligatory charity)


     3. and be sincere and true to every Muslim.

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 57

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Ziyad bin'Ilaqa:
Hadith: 

     I heard Jarir bin 'Abdullah (Praising Allah). On the day when 
     Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba died, he (Jarir) got up (on the pulpit) and 
     thanked and praised Allah and said, "Be afraid of Allah alone Who has 
     none along with Him to be worshipped.(You should) be calm and quiet 
     till the (new) chief comes to you and he will come to you soon. Ask 
     Allah's forgiveness for your (late) chief because he himself loved to 
     forgive others." Jarir added, "Amma badu (now then), I went to the 
     Prophet and said, 'I give my pledge of allegiance to you for Islam." 
     The Prophet (ﷺ) conditioned (my pledge) for me to be sincere and true to 
     every Muslim so I gave my pledge to him for this. By the Lord of this 
     mosque! I am sincere and true to you (Muslims). Then Jarir asked for 
     Allah's forgiveness and came down (from the pulpit).

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 58

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: While the Prophet (ﷺ) was saying something in a gathering, a Bedouin came and asked him, "When 
would the Hour (Doomsday) take place?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) continued his talk, so some people said that 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) had heard the question, but did not like what that Bedouin had asked. Some of them 
said that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) had not heard it. When the Prophet (ﷺ) finished his speech, he said, "Where is 
the questioner, who inquired about the Hour (Doomsday)?" The Bedouin said, "I am here, O Allah's 
Apostle ." Then the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When honesty is lost, then wait for the Hour (Doomsday)." The 
Bedouin said, "How will that be lost?" The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When the power or authority comes in the 
hands of unfit persons, then wait for the Hour (Doomsday.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 59

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Amr:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) remained behind us in a journey. He joined us while we were performing ablution 
for the prayer which was over-due. We were just passing wet hands over our feet (and not washing 
them properly) so the Prophet (ﷺ) addressed us in a loud voice and said twice or thrice: "Save your heels 
from the fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 60

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Amongst the trees, there is a tree, the leaves of which do not fall and is like a 
Muslim. Tell me the name of that tree." Everybody started thinking about the trees of the desert areas. 
And I thought of the date-palm tree but felt shy to answer the others then asked, "What is that tree, O 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ?" He replied, "It is the date-palm tree."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 61

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Amongst the trees, there is a tree, the leaves of which do not fall and is like a 
Muslim. Tell me the name of that tree." Everybody started thinking about the trees of the desert areas. 
And I thought of the date-palm tree. The others then asked, "Please inform us what is that tree, O 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)?" He replied, "It is the date-palm tree."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 62

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: While we were sitting with the Prophet (ﷺ) in the mosque, a man came riding on a camel. He made his 
camel kneel down in the mosque, tied its foreleg and then said: "Who amongst you is Muhammad?" 
At that time the Prophet (ﷺ) was sitting amongst us (his companions) leaning on his arm. We replied, 
"This white man reclining on his arm." The man then addressed him, "O Son of `Abdul Muttalib." 
The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I am here to answer your questions." The man said to the Prophet, "I want to ask 
you something and will be hard in questioning. So do not get angry." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Ask whatever 
you want." The man said, "I ask you by your Lord, and the Lord of those who were before you, has 
Allah sent you as an Apostle to all the mankind?" The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "By Allah, yes." The man 
further said, "I ask you by Allah. Has Allah ordered you to offer five prayers in a day and night (24 
hours).? He replied, "By Allah, Yes." The man further said, "I ask you by Allah! Has Allah ordered 
you to observe fasts during this month of the year (i.e. Ramadan)?" He replied, "By Allah, Yes." The 
man further said, "I ask you by Allah. Has Allah ordered you to take Zakat (obligatory charity) from 
our rich people and distribute it amongst our poor people?" The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "By Allah, yes." 
Thereupon that man said, "I have believed in all that with which you have been sent, and I have been 
sent by my people as a messenger, and I am Dimam bin Tha`laba from the brothers of Bani Sa`d bin 
Bakr."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 63

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Abbas:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) gave a letter to a person and ordered him to go and deliver it to the Governor of 
Bahrain. (He did so) and the Governor of Bahrain sent it to Chousroes, who read that letter and then 
tore it to pieces. (The sub-narrator (Ibn Shihab) thinks that Ibn Al-Musaiyab said that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
invoked Allah against them (saying), "May Allah tear them into pieces, and disperse them all totally.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 64

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) wrote a letter or had an idea of writing a letter. The Prophet (ﷺ) was told that they 
(rulers) would not read letters unless they were sealed. So the Prophet (ﷺ) got a silver ring made with 
"Muhammad Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)" engraved on it. As if I were just observing its white glitter in the hand 
of the Prophet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 65

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Waqid Al-Laithi:
Hadith: While Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was sitting in the mosque with some people, three men came. Two of them 
came in front of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and the third one went away. The two persons kept on standing 
before Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) for a while and then one of them found a place in the circle and sat there while 
the other sat behind the gathering, and the third one went away. When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) finished his 
preaching, he said, "Shall I tell you about these three persons? One of them betook himself to Allah, 
so Allah took him into His grace and mercy and accommodated him, the second felt shy from Allah, 
so Allah sheltered Him in His mercy (and did not punish him), while the third turned his face from 
Allah and went away, so Allah turned His face from him likewise. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 66

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakra's father:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) was riding his camel and a man was holding its rein. The Prophet (ﷺ) asked, "What is 
the day today?" We kept quiet, thinking that he might give that day another name. He said, "Isn't it the 
day of Nahr (slaughtering of the animals of sacrifice)" We replied, "Yes." He further asked, "Which 
month is this?" We again kept quiet, thinking that he might give it another name. Then he said, "Isn't it 
the month of Dhul-Hijja?" We replied, "Yes." He said, "Verily! Your blood, property and honor are 
sacred to one another (i.e. Muslims) like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this month of yours and in 
this city of yours. It is incumbent upon those who are present to inform those who are absent because 
those who are absent might comprehend (what I have said) better than the present audience."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 67

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Mas`ud:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to take care of us in preaching by selecting a suitable time, so that we might not get 
bored. (He abstained from pestering us with sermons and knowledge all the time).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 68

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Facilitate things to people (concerning religious matters), and do not make it hard 
for them and give them good tidings and do not make them run away (from Islam).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 69

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Wail:
Hadith: `Abdullah used to give a religious talk to the people on every Thursday. Once a man said, "O Aba 
`Abdur-Rahman! (By Allah) I wish if you could preach us daily." He replied, "The only thing which 
prevents me from doing so, is that I hate to bore you, and no doubt I take care of you in preaching by 
selecting a suitable time just as the Prophet (ﷺ) used to do with us, for fear of making us bored."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 70

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muawiya:
Hadith: I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, "If Allah wants to do good to a person, He makes him comprehend the 
religion. I am just a distributor, but the grant is from Allah. (And remember) that this nation (true 
Muslims) will keep on following Allah's teachings strictly and they will not be harmed by any one 
going on a different path till Allah's order (Day of Judgment) is established."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 71

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: We were with the Prophet (ﷺ) and fresh dates of a palm tree were brought to him. On that he said, 
"Amongst the trees, there is a tree which resembles a Muslim." I wanted to say that it was the datepalm 
tree but as I was the youngest of all (of them) I kept quiet. And then the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "It is the 
date-palm tree."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 72

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Mas`ud:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Do not wish to be like anyone except in two cases. (The first is) A person, whom 
Allah has given wealth and he spends it righteously; (the second is) the one whom Allah has given 
wisdom (the Holy Qur'an) and he acts according to it and teaches it to others." (Fath-al-Bari page 177 
Vol. 1)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 73

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: That he differed with Hur bin Qais bin Hisn Al-Fazari regarding the companion of (the Prophet) 
Moses. Ibn `Abbas said that he was Al Khadir. Meanwhile, Ubai bin Ka`b passed by them and Ibn 
`Abbas called him, saying "My friend (Hur) and I have differed regarding Moses' companion, whom 
Moses asked the way to meet. Have you heard the Prophet (ﷺ) mentioning something about him? He said, 
"Yes. I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, "While Moses was sitting in the company of some Israelites, a 
man came and asked him. "Do you know anyone who is more learned than you? Moses replied: "No." 
So Allah sent the Divine Inspiration to Moses: 'Yes, Our slave Khadir (is more learned than you.)' 
Moses asked (Allah) how to meet him (Khadir). So Allah made the fish as a sign for him and he was 
told that when the fish was lost, he should return (to the place where he had lost it) and there he would 
meet him (Al-Khadir). So Moses went on looking for the sign of the fish in the sea. The servant-boy 
of Moses said to him: Do you remember when we betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the 
fish, none but Satan made me forget to remember it. On that Moses said: 'That is what we have been 
seeking? (18.64) So they went back retracing their footsteps, and found Khadir. (And) what happened 
further to them is narrated in the Holy Qur'an by Allah. (18.54 up to 18.82)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 74

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) embraced me and said, "O Allah! Bestow on him the knowledge of the Book 
(Qur'an).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 75

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Once I came riding a she-ass and had (just) attained the age of puberty. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was offering 
the prayer at Mina. There was no wall in front of him and I passed in front of some of the row while 
they were offering their prayers. There I let the she-ass loose to graze and entered the row, and nobody 
objected to it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 76

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mahmud bin Rabi`a:
Hadith: When I was a boy of five, I remember, the Prophet (ﷺ) took water from a bucket (used for getting water 
out of a well) with his mouth and threw it on my face.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 77

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: that he differed with Hur bin Qais bin Hisn Al-Fazari regarding the companion of the Prophet (ﷺ) Moses. 
Meanwhile, Ubai bin Ka`b passed by them and Ibn `Abbas called him saying, "My friend (Hur) and I 
have differed regarding Moses' companion whom Moses asked the way to meet. Have you heard 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) mentioning something about him? Ubai bin Ka`b said: "Yes, I heard the Prophet (ﷺ) 
mentioning something about him (saying) while Moses was sitting in the company of some Israelites, 
a man came and asked him: "Do you know anyone who is more learned than you? Moses replied: 
"No." So Allah sent the Divine Inspiration to Moses: '--Yes, Our slave Khadir is more learned than 
you. Moses asked Allah how to meet him (Al-Khadir). So Allah made the fish a sign for him and he 
was told when the fish was lost, he should return (to the place where he had lost it) and there he would 
meet him (Al-Khadir). So Moses went on looking for the sign of the fish in the sea. The servant-boy 
of Moses said: 'Do you remember when we betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the fish, none 
but Satan made me forget to remember it. On that Moses said, 'That is what we have been seeking.' So 
they went back retracing their footsteps, and found Khadir. (and) what happened further about them is 
narrated in the Holy Qur'an by Allah." (18.54 up to 18.82)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 78

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The example of guidance and knowledge with which Allah has sent me is like 
abundant rain falling on the earth, some of which was fertile soil that absorbed rain water and brought 
forth vegetation and grass in abundance. (And) another portion of it was hard and held the rain water 
and Allah benefited the people with it and they utilized it for drinking, making their animals drink 
from it and for irrigation of the land for cultivation. (And) a portion of it was barren which could 
neither hold the water nor bring forth vegetation (then that land gave no benefits). The first is the 
example of the person who comprehends Allah's religion and gets benefit (from the knowledge) which 
Allah has revealed through me (the Prophets and learns and then teaches others. The last example is 
that of a person who does not care for it and does not take Allah's guidance revealed through me (He 
is like that barren land.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 79

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "From among the portents of the Hour are (the following): 
-1. Religious knowledge will be taken away (by the death of Religious learned men). 
-2. (Religious) ignorance will prevail. 
-3. Drinking of Alcoholic drinks (will be very common). 
-4. There will be prevalence of open illegal sexual intercourse.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 80

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: I will narrate to you a Hadith and none other than I will tell you about after it. I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
saying: From among the portents of the Hour are (the following): 
-1. Religious knowledge will decrease (by the death of religious learned men). 
-2. Religious ignorance will prevail. 
-3. There will be prevalence of open illegal sexual intercourse. 
-4. Women will increase in number and men will decrease in number so much so that fifty women 
will be looked after by one man.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 81

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "While I was sleeping, I saw that a cup full of milk was brought to me and I 
drank my fill till I noticed (the milk) its wetness coming out of my nails. Then I gave the remaining 
milk to `Umar Ibn Al-Khattab" The companions of the Prophet (ﷺ) asked, "What have you interpreted 
(about this dream)? "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ,!" he replied, "(It is religious) knowledge."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 82

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Amr bin Al `Aas:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stopped (for a while near the Jimar) at Mina during his last Hajj for the people and 
they were asking him questions. A man came and said, "I forgot and got my head shaved before 
slaughtering the Hadi (sacrificing animal)." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "There is no harm, go and do the 
slaughtering now." Then another person came and said, "I forgot and slaughtered (the camel) before 
Rami (throwing of the pebbles) at the Jamra." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Do the Rami now and there is no 
harm." 
The narrator added: So on that day, when the Prophet (ﷺ) was asked about anything (as regards the 
ceremonies of Hajj) performed before or after its due time, his reply was: "Do it (now) and there is no 
harm."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 83

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Somebody said to the Prophet (during his last Hajj), "I did the slaughtering before doing the Rami.' 
The Prophet (ﷺ) beckoned with his hand and said, "There is no harm in that." Then another person said. "I 
got my head shaved before offering the sacrifice." The Prophet (ﷺ) beckoned with his hand saying, "There 
is no harm in that."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 84

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "(Religious) knowledge will be taken away (by the death of religious scholars) 
ignorance (in religion) and afflictions will appear; and Harj will increase." It was asked, "What is 
Harj, O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)?" He replied by beckoning with his hand indicating "killing." (Fath-al-Bari 
Page 192, Vol. 1)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 85

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Asma':
Hadith: I came to `Aisha while she was praying, and said to her, "What has happened to the people?" She 
pointed out towards the sky. (I looked towards the mosque), and saw the people offering the prayer. 
Aisha said, "Subhan Allah." I said to her, "Is there a sign?" She nodded with her head meaning, "Yes." 
I, too, then stood (for the prayer of eclipse) till I became (nearly) unconscious and later on I poured 
water on my head. After the prayer, the Prophet (ﷺ) praised and glorified Allah and then said, 
"Just now at this place I have seen what I have never seen before, including Paradise and Hell. No 
doubt it has been inspired to me that you will be put to trials in your graves and these trials will be like 
the trials of Masih-ad-Dajjal or nearly like it (the sub narrator is not sure which expression Asma' 
used). You will be asked, 'What do you know about this man (the Prophet (ﷺ) Muhammad)?' Then the 
faithful believer (or Asma' said a similar word) will reply, 'He is Muhammad Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) who had 
come to us with clear evidences and guidance and so we accepted his teachings and followed him. 
And he is Muhammad.' And he will repeat it thrice. Then the angels will say to him, 'Sleep in peace as 
we have come to know that you were a faithful believer.' On the other hand, a hypocrite or a doubtful 
person will reply, 'I do not know, but I heard the people saying something and so I said it.' (the same). 
"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 86

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Jamra:
Hadith: I was an interpreter between the people and Ibn `Abbas. Once Ibn `Abbas said that a delegation of the 
tribe of `Abdul Qais came to the Prophet (ﷺ) who asked them, "Who are the people (i.e. you)? (Or) who 
are the delegates?" They replied, "We are from the tribe of Rabi`a." Then the Prophet (ﷺ) said to them, 
"Welcome, O people (or said, "O delegation (of `Abdul Qais).") Neither will you have disgrace nor 
will you regret." They said, "We have come to you from a distant place and there is the tribe of the 
infidels of Mudar intervening between you and us and we cannot come to you except in the sacred 
month. So please order us to do something good (religious deeds) and that we may also inform our 
people whom we have left behind (at home) and that we may enter Paradise (by acting on them.)" The 
Prophet ordered them to do four things, and forbade them from four things. He ordered them to 
believe in Allah Alone, the Honorable the Majestic and said to them, "Do you know what is meant by 
believing in Allah Alone?" They replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." Thereupon the Prophet (ﷺ) 
said, "(That means to testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is 
His Apostle, to offer prayers perfectly, to pay Zakat, to observe fasts during the month of Ramadan, 
(and) to pay Al-Khumus (one fifth of the booty to be given in Allah's cause)." Then he forbade them 
four things, namely Ad-Dubba.' Hantam, Muzaffat (and) An-Naqir or Muqaiyar (These were the 
names of pots in which alcoholic drinks used to be prepared). The Prophet (ﷺ) further said, "Memorize 
them (these instructions) and tell them to the people whom you have left behind."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 87

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Mulaika:
Hadith: `Uqba bin Al-Harith said that he had married the daughter of Abi Ihab bin `Aziz. Later on a woman 
came to him and said, "I have suckled (nursed) `Uqba and the woman whom he married (his wife) at 
my breast." `Uqba said to her, "Neither I knew that you have suckled (nursed) me nor did you tell 
me." Then he rode over to see Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) at Medina, and asked him about it. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, 
"How can you keep her as a wife when it has been said (that she is your foster-sister)?" Then `Uqba 
divorced her, and she married another man.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 88

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Umar:
Hadith: My Ansari neighbor from Bani Umaiya bin Zaid who used to live at `Awali Al-Medina and used to 
visit the Prophet (ﷺ) by turns. He used to go one day and I another day. When I went I used to bring the 
news of that day regarding the Divine Inspiration and other things, and when he went, he used to do 
the same for me. Once my Ansari friend, in his turn (on returning from the Prophet), knocked 
violently at my door and asked if I was there." I became horrified and came out to him. He said, 
"Today a great thing has happened." I then went to Hafsa and saw her weeping. I asked her, "Did 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) divorce you all?" She replied, "I do not know." Then, I entered upon the Prophet (ﷺ) and 
said while standing, "Have you divorced your wives?" The Prophet (ﷺ) replied in the negative. On that I 
said, "Allahu-Akbar (Allah is Greater)." (See Hadith No. 119, Vol. 3 for details)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 89

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Mas`ud Al-Ansari:
Hadith: Once a man said to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I may not attend the (compulsory 
congregational) prayer because so and so (the Imam) prolongs the prayer when he leads us for it. The 
narrator added: "I never saw the Prophet (ﷺ) more furious in giving advice than he was on that day. The 
Prophet said, "O people! Some of you make others dislike good deeds (the prayers). So whoever leads 
the people in prayer should shorten it because among them there are the sick the weak and the needy 
(having some jobs to do).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 90

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
Hadith: A man asked the Prophet (ﷺ) about the picking up of a "Luqata" (fallen lost thing). The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, 
"Recognize and remember its tying material and its container, and make public announcement (about 
it) for one year, then utilize it but give it to its owner if he comes." Then the person asked about the 
lost camel. On that, the Prophet (ﷺ) got angry and his cheeks or his Face became red and he said, "You 
have no concern with it as it has its water container, and its feet and it will reach water, and eat (the 
leaves) of trees till its owner finds it." The man then asked about the lost sheep. The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, 
"It is either for you, for your brother (another person) or for the wolf."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 91

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) was asked about things which he did not like, but when the questioners insisted, the 
Prophet got angry. He then said to the people, "Ask me anything you like." A man asked, "Who is my 
father?" The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "Your father is Hudhafa." Then another man got up and said, "Who is 
my father, O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ?" He replied, "Your father is Salim, Maula (the freed slave) of Shaiba." 
So when `Umar saw that (the anger) on the face of the Prophet (ﷺ) he said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! We repent 
to Allah (Our offending you).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 92

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: One day Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came out (before the people) and `Abdullah bin Hudhafa stood up and asked 
(him) "Who is my father?" The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "Your father is Hudhafa." The Prophet (ﷺ) told them 
repeatedly (in anger) to ask him anything they liked. `Umar knelt down before the Prophet (ﷺ) and said 
thrice, "We accept Allah as (our) Lord and Islam as (our) religion and Muhammad as (our) Prophet." 
After that the Prophet (ﷺ) became silent.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 93

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) asked permission to enter, he knocked the door thrice with greeting and 
whenever he spoke a sentence (said a thing) he used to repeat it thrice. (See Hadith No. 261, Vol. 8).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 94

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) spoke a sentence (said a thing), he used to repeat it thrice so that the people 
could understand it properly from him and whenever he asked permission to enter, (he knocked the 
door) thrice with greeting.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 95

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Amr:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) remained behind us in a journey. He joined us while we were performing 
ablution for the `Asr prayer which was over-due. We were just passing wet hands over our feet (not 
washing them properly) so the Prophet (ﷺ) addressed us in a loud voice and said twice or thrice, "Save 
your heels from the fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 96

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Burda's father:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said "Three persons will have a double reward:


     1. A Person from the people of the scriptures who believed in his 
     prophet (Jesus or Moses) and then believed in the Prophet (ﷺ) Muhammad (i 
     .e. has embraced Islam).


     2. A slave who discharges his duties to Allah and his master.


     3. A master of a woman-slave who teaches her good manners and educates
     her in the best possible way (the religion) and manumits her and then 
     marries her."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 97

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Hadith: 

     Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came out while Bilal was accompanying him. He 
     went towards the women thinking that they had not heard him (i.e. his 
     sermon). So he preached them and ordered them to pay alms. (Hearing 
     that) the women started giving alms; some donated their ear-rings, 
     some gave their rings and Bilal was collecting them in the corner of 
     his garment.

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 98

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: I said: "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Who will be the luckiest person, who will gain your intercession on the 
Day of Resurrection?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said: O Abu Huraira! "I have thought that none will ask me 
about it before you as I know your longing for the (learning of) Hadiths. The luckiest person who will 
have my intercession on the Day of Resurrection will be the one who said sincerely from the bottom 
of his heart "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 99

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Amr bin Al-`As:
Hadith: I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, "Allah does not take away the knowledge, by taking it away from (the 
hearts of) the people, but takes it away by the death of the religious learned men till when none of the 
(religious learned men) remains, people will take as their leaders ignorant persons who when 
consulted will give their verdict without knowledge. So they will go astray and will lead the people 
astray."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 100

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: Some women requested the Prophet (ﷺ) to fix a day for them as the men were taking all his time. On that 
he promised them one day for religious lessons and commandments. Once during such a lesson the 
Prophet said, "A woman whose three children die will be shielded by them from the Hell fire." On that 
a woman asked, "If only two die?" He replied, "Even two (will shield her from the Hell-fire).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 101

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: as above (the sub narrators are different). Abu Huraira qualified the three children referred to in the 
above mentioned Hadith as not having reached the age of committing sins (i.e. age of puberty) .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 102

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:
Hadith: Whenever `Aisha (the wife of the Prophet) heard anything which she did not understand, she used to 
ask again till she understood it completely. Aisha said: "Once the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever will be 
called to account (about his deeds on the Day of Resurrection) will surely be punished." I said, 
"Doesn't Allah say: "He surely will receive an easy reckoning." (84.8) The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "This 
means only the presentation of the accounts but whoever will be argued about his account, will 
certainly be ruined."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 103

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sa`id:
Hadith: Abu Shuraih said, "When `Amr bin Sa`id was sending the troops to Mecca (to fight `Abdullah bin Az- 
Zubair) I said to him, 'O chief! Allow me to tell you what the Prophet (ﷺ) said on the day following the 
conquests of Mecca. My ears heard and my heart comprehended, and I saw him with my own eyes, 
when he said it. He glorified and praised Allah and then said, "Allah and not the people has made 
Mecca a sanctuary. So anybody who has belief in Allah and the Last Day (i.e. a Muslim) should 
neither shed blood in it nor cut down its trees. If anybody argues that fighting is allowed in Mecca as 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) did fight (in Mecca), tell him that Allah gave permission to His Apostle, but He did 
not give it to you. The Prophet (ﷺ) added: Allah allowed me only for a few hours on that day (of the 
conquest) and today (now) its sanctity is the same (valid) as it was before. So it is incumbent upon 
those who are present to convey it (this information) to those who are absent." Abu- Shuraih was 
asked, "What did `Amr reply?" He said `Amr said, "O Abu Shuraih! I know better than you (in this 
respect). Mecca does not give protection to one who disobeys (Allah) or runs after committing 
murder, or theft (and takes refuge in Mecca).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 104

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Bakra:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said. No doubt your blood, property, the sub-narrator Muhammad thought that Abu 
Bakra had also mentioned and your honor (chastity), are sacred to one another as is the sanctity of this 
day of yours in this month of yours. It is incumbent on those who are present to inform those who are 
absent." (Muhammad the Sub-narrator used to say, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) told the truth.") The Prophet (ﷺ) 
repeated twice: "No doubt! Haven't I conveyed Allah's message to you.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 105

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ali:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Do not tell a lie against me for whoever tells a lie against me (intentionally) then 
he will surely enter the Hell-fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 106

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Az-Zubair:
Hadith: I said to my father, 'I do not hear from you any narration (Hadith) of Allah s Apostle as I hear (his 
narration) from so and so?" Az-Zubair replied. l was always with him (the Prophet) and I heard him 
saying "Whoever tells a lie against me (intentionally) then (surely) let him occupy, his seat in Hellfire.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 107

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The fact which stops me from narrating a great number of Hadiths to you is that the Prophet (ﷺ) said: 
"Whoever tells a lie against me intentionally, then (surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 108

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salama:
Hadith: I heard the Prophet (ﷺ) saying, "Whoever (intentionally) ascribes to me what I have not said then (surely) 
let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 109

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Name yourselves with my name (use my name) but do not name yourselves with 
my Kunya name (i.e. Abul Qasim). And whoever sees me in a dream then surely he has seen me for 
Satan cannot impersonate me. And whoever tells a lie against me (intentionally), then (surely) let him 
occupy his seat in Hell-fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 110

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ash-Shu`bi:
Hadith: Abu Juhaifa said, "I asked `Ali, 'Have you got any book (which has been revealed to the Prophet (ﷺ) apart 
from the Qur'an)?' `Ali replied, 'No, except Allah's Book or the power of understanding which has 
been bestowed (by Allah) upon a Muslim or what is (written) in this sheet of paper (with me).' Abu 
Juhaifa said, "I asked, 'What is (written) in this sheet of paper?' `Ali replied, it deals with The Diyya 
(compensation (blood money) paid by the killer to the relatives of the victim), the ransom for the 
releasing of the captives from the hands of the enemies, and the law that no Muslim should be killed 
in Qisas (equality in punishment) for the killing of (a disbeliever).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 111

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: In the year of the Conquest of Mecca, the tribe of Khuza`a killed a man from the tribe of Bani Laith in 
revenge for a killed person, belonging to them. They informed the Prophet (ﷺ) about it. So he rode his 
Rahila (she-camel for riding) and addressed the people saying, "Allah held back the killing from 
Mecca. (The sub-narrator is in doubt whether the Prophet (ﷺ) said "elephant or killing," as the Arabic 
words standing for these words have great similarity in shape), but He (Allah) let His Apostle and the 
believers over power the infidels of Mecca. Beware! (Mecca is a sanctuary) Verily! Fighting in Mecca 
was not permitted for anyone before me nor will it be permitted for anyone after me. It (war) in it was 
made legal for me for few hours or so on that day. No doubt it is at this moment a sanctuary, it is not 
allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs or to uproot its trees or to pick up its Luqat (fallen things) except 
by a person who will look for its owner (announce it publicly). And if somebody is killed, then his 
closest relative has the right to choose one of the two-- the blood money (Diyya) or retaliation having 
the killer killed. In the meantime a man from Yemen came and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Get that 
written for me." The Prophet (ﷺ) ordered his companions to write that for him. Then a man from Quraish 
said, "Except Al-Idhkhir (a type of grass that has good smell) O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), as we use it in our 
houses and graves." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Except Al-Idhkhir i.e. Al-Idhkhir is allowed to be plucked."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 112

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: There is none among the companions of the Prophet (ﷺ) who has narrated more Hadiths than I except 
`Abdullah bin `Amr (bin Al-`As) who used to write them and I never did the same.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 113

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: Ibn `Abbas said, "When the ailment of the Prophet (ﷺ) became worse, he said, 'Bring for me (writing) 
paper and I will write for you a statement after which you will not go astray.' But `Umar said, 'The 
Prophet is seriously ill, and we have got Allah's Book with us and that is sufficient for us.' But the 
companions of the Prophet (ﷺ) differed about this and there was a hue and cry. On that the Prophet (ﷺ) said to 
them, 'Go away (and leave me alone). It is not right that you should quarrel in front of me." Ibn 
`Abbas came out saying, "It was most unfortunate (a great disaster) that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was prevented 
from writing that statement for them because of their disagreement and noise. (Note: It is apparent 
from this Hadith that Ibn `Abbas had witnessed the event and came out saying this statement. The 
truth is not so, for Ibn `Abbas used to say this statement on narrating the Hadith and he had not 
witnessed the event personally. See Fath Al-Bari Vol. 1, p.220 footnote.) (See Hadith No. 228, Vol. 
4).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 114

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Salama:
Hadith: One night Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) got up and said, "Subhan Allah! How many afflictions have been descended 
tonight and how many treasures have been disclosed! Go and wake the sleeping lady occupants of 
these dwellings (his wives) up (for prayers). A well-dressed (soul) in this world may be naked in the 
Hereafter. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 115

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) led us in the `Isha' prayer during the last days of his life and after finishing it (the 
prayer) (with Taslim) he said: "Do you realize (the importance of) this night?" Nobody present on the 
surface of the earth tonight will be living after the completion of one hundred years from this night."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 116

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt Maimuna bint Al-Harith (the wife of the Prophet (ﷺ) ) while 
the Prophet (ﷺ) was there with her during her night turn. The Prophet (ﷺ) offered the `Isha' prayer (in the 
mosque), returned home and after having prayed four rak`at, he slept. Later on he got up at night and 
then asked whether the boy (or he used a similar word) had slept? Then he got up for the prayer and I 
stood up by his left side but he made me stand to his right and offered five rak`at followed by two 
more rak`at. Then he slept and I heard him snoring and then (after a while) he left for the (Fajr) 
prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 117

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: People say that I have narrated many Hadiths (The Prophet's narration). Had it not been for two verses 
in the Qur'an, I would not have narrated a single Hadith, and the verses are: 
"Verily those who conceal the clear sign and the guidance which We have sent down . . . (up to) Most 
Merciful." (2:159-160). And no doubt our Muhajir (emigrant) brothers used to be busy in the market 
with their business (bargains) and our Ansari brothers used to be busy with their property 
(agriculture). But I (Abu Huraira) used to stick to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) contented with what will fill my 
stomach and I used to attend that which they used not to attend and I used to memorize that which 
they used not to memorize.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 118

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: I said to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) "I hear many narrations (Hadiths) from you but I forget them." Allah's 
Apostle said, "Spread your Rida' (garment)." I did accordingly and then he moved his hands as if 
filling them with something (and emptied them in my Rida') and then said, "Take and wrap this sheet 
over your body." I did it and after that I never forgot any thing.
Narrated Ibrahim bin Al-Mundhir:

Ibn Abi Fudaik narrated the same as above (Hadith...119) but added that the Prophet (ﷺ) had moved his 
hands as if filling them with something and then he emptied them in the Rida' of Abu Huraira.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 119

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: I have memorized two kinds of knowledge from Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) . I have propagated one of them to 
you and if I propagated the second, then my pharynx (throat) would be cut (i.e. killed).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 120

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jarir:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said to me during Hajjat-al-Wida`: Let the people keep quiet and listen. Then he said 
(addressing the people), "Do not (become infidels) revert to disbelief after me by striking the necks 
(cutting the throats) of one another (killing each other).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 121

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sa`id bin Jubair:
Hadith: I said to Ibn `Abbas, "Nauf-Al-Bakali claims that Moses (the companion of Khadir) was not the 
Moses of Bani Israel but he was another Moses." Ibn `Abbas remarked that the enemy of Allah (Nauf) 
was a liar.
Narrated Ubai bin Ka`b:

The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Once the Prophet (ﷺ) Moses stood up and addressed Bani Israel. He was asked, "Who 
is the most learned man amongst the people. He said, "I am the most learned." Allah admonished 
Moses as he did not attribute absolute knowledge to Him (Allah). So Allah inspired to him "At the 
junction of the two seas there is a slave amongst my slaves who is more learned than you." Moses 
said, "O my Lord! How can I meet him?" Allah said: Take a fish in a large basket (and proceed) and 
you will find him at the place where you will lose the fish. So Moses set out along with his (servant) 
boy, Yusha` bin Noon and carried a fish in a large basket till they reached a rock, where they laid their 
heads (i.e. lay down) and slept. The fish came out of the basket and it took its way into the sea as in a 
tunnel. So it was an amazing thing for both Moses and his (servant) boy. They proceeded for the rest 
of that night and the following day. When the day broke, Moses said to his (servant) boy: "Bring us 
our early meal. No doubt, we have suffered much fatigue in this journey." Moses did not get tired till 
he passed the place about which he was told. There the (servant) boy told Moses, "Do you remember 
when we betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the fish." Moses remarked, "That is what we 
have been seeking. So they went back retracing their footsteps, till they reached the rock. There they 
saw a man covered with a garment (or covering himself with his own garment). Moses greeted him. 
Al-Khadir replied saying, "How do people greet each other in your land?" 
Moses said, "I am Moses." He asked, "The Moses of Bani Israel?" Moses replied in the affirmative 
and added, "May I follow you so that you teach me of that knowledge which you have been taught." 
Al-Khadir replied, "Verily! You will not be able to remain patient with me, O Moses! I have some of 
the knowledge of Allah which He has taught me and which you do not know, while you have some 
knowledge which Allah has taught you which I do not know." Moses said, "Allah willing, you will 
find me patient and I will disobey no order of yours. So both of them set out walking along the 
seashore, as they did not have a boat. In the meantime a boat passed by them and they requested the 
crew of the boat to take them on board. The crew recognized Al-Khadir and took them on board 
without fare. Then a sparrow came and stood on the edge of the boat and dipped its beak once or twice 
in the sea. Al-Khadir said: "O Moses! My knowledge and your knowledge have not decreased Allah's 
knowledge except as much as this sparrow has decreased the water of the sea with its beak." Al- 
Khadir went to one of the planks of the boat and plucked it out. Moses said, "These people gave us a 
free lift but you have broken their boat and scuttled it so as to drown its people." Al-Khadir replied, 
"Didn't I tell you that you will not be able to remain patient with me." Moses said, "Call me not to 
account for what I forgot." The first (excuse) of Moses was that he had forgotten. 
Then they proceeded further and found a boy playing with other boys. Al-Khadir took hold of the 
boy's head from the top and plucked it out with his hands (i.e. killed him). Moses said, "Have you 
killed an innocent soul who has killed none." Al-Khadir replied, "Did I not tell you that you cannot 
remain patient with me?" Then they both proceeded till when they came to the people of a town, they 
asked them for food, but they refused to entertain them. Then they found there a wall on the point of 
collapsing. Al-Khadir repaired it with his own hands. Moses said, "If you had wished, surely you 
could have taken wages for it." Al-Khadir replied, "This is the parting between you and me." The 
Prophet added, "May Allah be Merciful to Moses! Would that he could have been more patient to 
learn more about his story with Al-Khadir. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 122

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: A man came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and asked, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! What kind of fighting is in Allah's cause? 
(I ask this), for some of us fight because of being enraged and angry and some for the sake of his pride 
and haughtiness." The Prophet (ﷺ) raised his head (as the questioner was standing) and said, "He who 
fights so that Allah's Word (Islam) should be superior, then he fights in Allah's cause."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 123

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Ammar:
Hadith: I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) near the Jamra and the people were asking him questions (about religious 
problems). A man asked, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I have slaughtered the Hadi (animal) before doing the 
Rami." The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "Do the Rami (now) and there is no harm." Another person asked, "O 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I got my head shaved before slaughtering the animal." The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "Do the 
slaughtering (now) and there is no harm." So on that day, when the Prophet (ﷺ) was asked about anything 
as regards the ceremonies of Hajj performed before or after its due time his reply was, "Do it (now) 
and there is no harm."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 124

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: While I was going with the Prophet (ﷺ) through the ruins of Medina and he was reclining on a date-palm 
leaf stalk, some Jews passed by. Some of them said to the others: Ask him (the Prophet) about the 
spirit. Some of them said that they should not ask him that question as he might give a reply which 
would displease them. But some of them insisted on asking, and so one of them stood up and asked, 
"O Abul-Qasim ! What is the spirit?" The Prophet (ﷺ) remained quiet. I thought he was being inspired 
Divinely. So I stayed till that state of the Prophet (while being inspired) was over. The Prophet (ﷺ) then 
said, "And they ask you (O Muhammad) concerning the spirit --Say: The spirit -- its knowledge is 
with my Lord. And of knowledge you (mankind) have been given only a little)." (17.85)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 125

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aswad:
Hadith: Ibn Az-Zubair said to me, "Aisha used to tell you secretly a number of things. What did she tell you 
about the Ka`ba?" I replied, "She told me that once the Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'O `Aisha! Had not your people 
been still close to the pre-Islamic period of ignorance (infidelity)! I would have dismantled the Ka`ba 
and would have made two doors in it; one for entrance and the other for exit." Later on Ibn Az-Zubair 
did the same.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 126

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu at-Tufail:
Hadith: The above mentioned Statement of `Ali.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 127

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: "Once Mu`adh was along with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) as a companion rider. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "O Mu`adh 
bin Jabal." Mu`adh replied, "Labbaik and Sa`daik. O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)!" Again the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "O 
Mu`adh!" Mu`adh said thrice, "Labbaik and Sa`daik, O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)!" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "There 
is none who testifies sincerely that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is 
his Apostle, except that Allah, will save him from the Hell-fire." Mu`adh said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ! 
Should I not inform the people about it so that they may have glad tidings?" He replied, "When the 
people hear about it, they will solely depend on it." Then Mu`adh narrated the above-mentioned 
Hadith just before his death, being afraid of committing sin (by not telling the knowledge).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 128

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: I was informed that the Prophet (ﷺ) had said to Mu`adh, "Whosoever will meet Allah without associating 
anything in worship with Him will go to Paradise." Mu`adh asked the Prophet, "Should I not inform 
the people of this good news?" The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "No, I am afraid, lest they should depend upon it 
(absolutely).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 129

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Salama:
Hadith: Um-Sulaim came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said, "Verily, Allah is not shy of (telling you) the truth. Is it 
necessary for a woman to take a bath after she has a wet dream (nocturnal sexual discharge?) The 
Prophet replied, "Yes, if she notices a discharge." Um Salama, then covered her face and asked, "O 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Does a woman get a discharge?" He replied, "Yes, let your right hand be in dust (An 
Arabic expression you say to a person when you contradict his statement meaning "you will not 
achieve goodness"), and that is why the son resembles his mother."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 130

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Amongst the trees there is a tree, the leaves of which do not fall and is 
like a Muslim, tell me the name of that tree." Everybody started thinking about the trees of the desert 
areas and I thought of the date-palm tree but felt shy (to answer). The others asked, "O Allah's 
Apostle! inform us of it." He replied, "it is the date-palm tree." I told my father what had come to my 
mind and on that he said, "Had you said it I would have preferred it to such and such a thing that I 
might possess."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 131

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ali:
Hadith: I used to get the emotional urethral discharge frequently so I requested Al-Miqdad to ask the Prophet (ﷺ) 
about it. Al-Miqdad asked him and he replied, "One has to perform ablution (after it)." (See Hadith 
No. 269).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 132

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: `Abdullah bin `Umar said: "A man got up in the mosque and said: O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 'At which place 
you order us that we should assume the Ihram?' Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, 'The residents of Medina 
should assure the Ihram from Dhil-Hulaifa, the people of Syria from Al-Juhfa and the people of Najd 
from Qarn." Ibn `Umar further said, "The people consider that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) had also said, 'The 
residents of Yemen should assume Ihram from Yalamlam.' " Ibn `Umar used to say, "I do not: 
remember whether Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) had said the last statement or not?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 133

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: A man asked the Prophet (ﷺ) : "What (kinds of clothes) should a Muhrim (a Muslim intending to perform 
`Umra or Hajj) wear? He replied, "He should not wear a shirt, a turban, trousers, a head cloak or 
garment scented with saffron or Wars (kinds of perfumes). And if he has no slippers, then he can use 
Khuffs (socks made from thick fabric or leather) but the socks should be cut short so as to make the 
ankles bare." (See Hadith No. 615, Vol. 2).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 134

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "The prayer of a person who does Hadath (passes urine, stool or wind) is not 
accepted till he performs the ablution." A person from Hadaramout asked Abu Huraira, "What is 
'Hadath'?" Abu Huraira replied, " 'Hadath' means the passing of wind."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 135

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nu`am Al-Mujmir:
Hadith: Once I went up the roof of the mosque, along with Abu Huraira. He perform ablution and said, "I 
heard the Prophet (ﷺ) saying, "On the Day of Resurrection, my followers will be called "Al-Ghurr-ul- 
Muhajjalun" from the trace of ablution and whoever can increase the area of his radiance should do so 
(i.e. by performing ablution regularly).' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 136

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abbad bin Tamim:
Hadith: My uncle asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about a person who imagined to have passed wind during the prayer. 
Allah' Apostle replied: "He should not leave his prayers unless he hears sound or smells something."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 137

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Kuraib:
Hadith: Ibn `Abbas said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) slept till he snored and then prayed (or probably lay till his breath 
sounds were heard and then got up and prayed)." Ibn `Abbas added: "I stayed overnight in the house 
of my aunt, Maimuna, the Prophet (ﷺ) slept for a part of the night, (See Fath-al-Bari page 249, Vol. 1), 
and late in the night, he got up and performed ablution from a hanging water skin, a light (perfect) 
ablution and stood up for the prayer. I, too, performed a similar ablution, then I went and stood on his 
left. He drew me to his right and prayed as much as Allah wished, and again lay and slept till his 
breath sounds were heard. Later on the Mu'adh-dhin (call maker for the prayer) came to him and 
informed him that it was time for Prayer. The Prophet (ﷺ) went with him for the prayer without 
performing a new ablution." (Sufyan said to `Amr that some people said, "The eyes of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
sleep but his heart does not sleep." `Amr replied, "I heard `Ubaid bin `Umar saying that the dreams of 
Prophets were Divine Inspiration, and then he recited the verse: 'I (Abraham) see in a dream, (O my 
son) that I offer you in sacrifice (to Allah)." (37.102) (See Hadith No. 183)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 138

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) proceeded from `Arafat till when he reached the mountain pass, he dismounted, 
urinated and then performed ablution but not a perfect one. I said to him, ("Is it the time for) the 
prayer, O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)?" He said, "The (place of) prayer is ahead of you." He rode till when he 
reached Al-Muzdalifa, he dismounted and performed ablution and a perfect one, The (call for) Iqama 
was pronounced and he led the Maghrib prayer. Then everybody made his camel kneel down at its 
place. Then the Iqama was pronounced for the `Isha' prayer which the Prophet (ﷺ) led and no prayer was 
offered in between the two . prayers (`Isha' and Maghrib).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 139

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ata' bin Yasar:
Hadith: Ibn `Abbas performed ablution and washed his face (in the following way): He ladled out a handful of 
water, rinsed his mouth and washed his nose with it by putting in water and then blowing it out. He 
then, took another handful (of water) and did like this (gesturing) joining both hands, and washed his 
face, took another handful of water and washed his right forearm. He again took another handful of 
water and washed his left forearm, and passed wet hands over his head and took another handful of 
water and poured it over his right foot (up to his ankles) and washed it thoroughly and similarly took 
another handful of water and washed thoroughly his left foot (up to the ankles) and said, "I saw 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) performing ablution in this way."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 140

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "If anyone of you on having sexual relations with his wife said (and he must say it 
before starting) 'In the name of Allah. O Allah! Protect us from Satan and also protect what you 
bestow upon us (i.e. the coming offspring) from Satan, and if it is destined that they should have a 
child then, Satan will never be able to harm that offspring."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 141

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) went to answer the call of nature, he used to say, "Allah-umma inni a`udhu 
bika minal khubuthi wal khaba'ith i.e. O Allah, I seek Refuge with You from all offensive and wicked 
things (evil deeds and evil spirits).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 142

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) entered a lavatory and I placed water for his ablution. He asked, "Who placed it?" 
He was informed accordingly and so he said, "O Allah! Make him (Ibn `Abbas) a learned scholar in 
religion (Islam).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 143

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If anyone of you goes to an open space for answering the call of nature he 
should neither face nor turn his back towards the Qibla; he should either face the east or the west."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 144

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: People say, "Whenever you sit for answering the call of nature, you should not face the Qibla or 
Baitul-Maqdis (Jerusalem)." I told them. "Once I went up the roof of our house and I saw Allah's 
Apostle answering the call of nature while sitting on two bricks facing Baitul-Maqdis (Jerusalem) (but 
there was a screen covering him. ' (Fath-al-Bari, Page 258, Vol. 1).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 145

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The wives of the Prophet (ﷺ) used to go to Al-Manasi, a vast open place (near Baqi` at Medina) to answer 
the call of nature at night. `Umar used to say to the Prophet (ﷺ) "Let your wives be veiled," but Allah's 
Apostle did not do so. One night Sauda bint Zam`a the wife of the Prophet (ﷺ) went out at `Isha' time and 
she was a tall lady. `Umar addressed her and said, "I have recognized you, O Sauda." He said so, as he 
desired eagerly that the verses of Al-Hijab (the observing of veils by the Muslim women) may be 
revealed. So Allah revealed the verses of "Al-Hijab" (A complete body cover excluding the eyes).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 146

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said to his wives, "You are allowed to go out to answer the call of nature. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 147

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: I went up to the roof of Hafsa's house for some job and I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) answering the call of 
nature facing Sham (Syria, Jordan, Palestine and Lebanon regarded as one country) with his back 
towards the Qibla. (See Hadith No. 147).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 148

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Once I went up the roof of our house and saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) answering the call of nature while 
sitting over two bricks facing Baitul-Maqdis (Jerusalem). (See Hadith No. 147).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 149

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went to answer the call of nature, I along with another boy used to 
accompany him with a tumbler full of water. (Hisham commented, "So that he might wash his private 
parts with it.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 150

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went to answer the call of nature, I along with another boy from us used to 
go behind him with a tumbler full of water.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 151

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went to answer the call of nature, I along with another boy used to carry a 
tumbler full of water (for cleaning the private parts) and a short spear (or stick).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 152

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Qatada:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whenever anyone of you drinks water, he should not breathe in the drinking 
utensil, and whenever anyone of you goes to a lavatory, he should neither touch his penis nor clean his 
private parts with his right hand."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 153

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Qatada:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whenever anyone of you makes water he should not hold his penis or clean his 
private parts with his right hand. (And while drinking) one should not breathe in the drinking utensil ."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 154

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: I followed the Prophet (ﷺ) while he was going out to answer the call of nature. He used not to look this 
way or that. So, when I approached near him he said to me, "Fetch for me some stones for ' cleaning 
the privates parts (or said something similar), and do not bring a bone or a piece of dung." So I 
brought the stones in the corner of my garment and placed them by his side and I then went away from 
him. When he finished (from answering the call of nature) he used, them .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 155

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) went out to answer the call of nature and asked me to bring three stones. I found two 
stones and searched for the third but could not find it. So took a dried piece of dung and brought it to 
him. He took the two stones and threw away the dung and said, "This is a filthy thing."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 156

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) performed ablution by washing the body parts only once.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 157

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Zaid:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) performed ablution by washing the body parts twice.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 158

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Humran:
Hadith: 

     (the slave of 'Uthman) I saw 'Uthman bin 'Affan asking for a tumbler 
     of water (and when it was brought) he poured water over his hands and 
     washed them thrice and then put his right hand in the water container 
     and rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting water in it and then 
     blowing it out. then he washed his face and forearms up to the 
     elbows thrice, passed his wet hands over his head and washed his feet 
     up to the ankles thrice. Then he said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said 'If 
     anyone performs ablution like that of mine and offers a two-rak'at 
     prayer during which he does not think of anything else (not related to
     the present prayer) then his past sins will be forgiven.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 159

Hadith Narrated by: After 
     performing the ablution 'Uthman said, "I am going to tell you a Hadith
     which I would not have told you, had I not been compelled by a certain
     Holy Verse (the sub narrator 'Urwa said:
Hadith: This verse is: "Verily, those
     who conceal the clear signs and the guidance which we have sent 
     down...)" (2:159). I heard the Prophet (ﷺ) saying, 'If a man performs 
     ablution perfectly and then offers the compulsory congregational 
     prayer, Allah will forgive his sins committed between that (prayer) 
     and the (next) prayer till he offers it.

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 160

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever performs ablution should clean his nose with water by putting the water 
in it and then blowing it out, and whoever cleans his private parts with stones should do it with odd 
number of stones."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 161

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If anyone of you performs ablution he should put water in his nose and then 
blow it out and whoever cleans his private parts with stones should do so with odd numbers. And 
whoever wakes up from his sleep should wash his hands before putting them in the water for ablution, 
because nobody knows where his hands were during sleep."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 162

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Amr:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) remained behind us on a journey. He joined us while we were performing ablution for the 
`Asr prayer which was overdue and we were just passing wet hands over our feet (not washing them 
thoroughly) so he addressed us in a loud voice saying twice , "Save your heels from the fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 163

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Humran:
Hadith: (the freed slave of `Uthman bin `Affan) I saw `Uthman bin `Affan asking (for a tumbler of water) to 
perform ablution (and when it was brought) he poured water from it over his hands and washed them 
thrice and then put his right hand in the water container and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by 
putting water in it and then blowing it out. Then he washed his face thrice and (then) forearms up to 
the elbows thrice, then passed his wet hands over his head and then washed each foot thrice. After that 
`Uthman said, "I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) performing ablution like this of mine, and he said, 'If anyone 
performs ablution like that of mine and offers a two-rak`at prayer during which he does not think of 
anything else (not related to the present prayer) then his past sins will be forgiven. '
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 164

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad Ibn Ziyad:
Hadith: I heard Abu Huraira saying as he passed by us while the people were performing ablution from a 
utensil containing water, "Perform ablution perfectly and thoroughly for Abul-Qasim (the Prophet) 
said, 'Save your heels from the Hell-fire.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 165

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ubaid Ibn Juraij:
Hadith: I asked `Abdullah bin `Umar, "O Abu `Abdur-Rahman! I saw you doing four things which I never 
saw being done by anyone of you companions?" `Abdullah bin `Umar said, "What are those, O Ibn 
Juraij?" I said, "I never saw you touching any corner of the Ka`ba except these (two) facing south 
(Yemen) and I saw you wearing shoes made of tanned leather and dyeing your hair with Hinna (a kind 
of red dye). I also noticed that whenever you were in Mecca, the people assume Ihram on seeing the 
new moon crescent (1st of Dhul-Hijja) while you did not assume the Ihlal (Ihram) -(Ihram is also 
called Ihlal which means 'Loud calling' because a Muhrim has to recite Talbiya aloud when assuming 
the state of Ihram) - till the 8th of Dhul-Hijja (Day of Tarwiya). `Abdullah replied, "Regarding the 
corners of Ka`ba, I never saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) touching except those facing south (Yemen) and 
regarding the tanned leather shoes, no doubt I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) wearing non-hairy shoes and he 
used to perform ablution while wearing the shoes (i.e. wash his feet and then put on the shoes). So I 
love to wear similar shoes. And about the dyeing of hair with Hinna; no doubt I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
dyeing his hair with it and that is why I like to dye (my hair with it). Regarding Ihlal, I did not see 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) assuming Ihlal till he set out for Hajj (on the 8th of Dhul-Hijja).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 166

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um-`Atiya:
Hadith: That the Prophet (ﷺ) at the time of washing his deceased daughter had said to them, "Start from the right 
side beginning with those parts which are washed in ablution."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 167

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to like to start from the right side on wearing shoes, combing his hair and cleaning 
or washing himself and on doing anything else.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 168

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) when the `Asr prayer was due and the people searched for water to perform 
ablution but they could not find it. Later on (a pot full of) water for ablution was brought to Allah's 
Apostle . He put his hand in that pot and ordered the people to perform ablution from it. I saw the 
water springing out from underneath his fingers till all of them performed the ablution (it was one of 
the miracles of the Prophet).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 169

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Seereen:
Hadith: I said to `Abida, "I have some of the hair of the Prophet (ﷺ) which I got from Anas or from his family." 
`Abida replied. "No doubt if I had a single hair of that it would have been dearer to me than the whole 
world and whatever is in it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 170

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) got his head shaved, Abu- Talha was the first to take some of his hair.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 171

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If a dog drinks from the utensil of anyone of you it is essential to wash it seven 
times."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 172

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "A man saw a dog eating mud from (the severity of) 
     thirst. So, that man took a shoe (and filled it) with water and kept 
     on pouring the water for the dog till it quenched its thirst. So Allah
     approved of his deed and made him to enter Paradise."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 173

Hadith Narrated by: And narrated 
     Hamza bin 'Abdullah:
Hadith: My father said. "During the lifetime of Allah's 
     Apostle, the dogs used to urinate, and pass through the mosques (come 
     and go), nevertheless they never used to sprinkle water on it (urine 
     of the dog.)"

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 174

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Adi bin Hatim:
Hadith: I asked the Prophet (about the hunting dogs) and he replied, "If you let loose (with Allah's name) your 
tamed dog after a game and it hunts it, you may eat it, but if the dog eats of (that game) then do not eat 
it because the dog has hunted it for itself." I further said, "Sometimes I send my dog for hunting and 
find another dog with it. He said, "Do not eat the game for you have mentioned Allah's name only on 
sending your dog and not the other dog."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 175

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "A person is considered in prayer as long as he is waiting for the prayer in the 
mosque as long as he does not do Hadath." A non-Arab man asked, "O Abu Huraira! What is 
Hadath?" I replied, "It is the passing of wind (from the anus) (that is one of the types of Hadath).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 176

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abbad bin Tamim:
Hadith: My uncle said: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "One should not leave his prayer unless he hears sound or smells 
something."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 177

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ali:
Hadith: I used to get emotional urethral discharges frequently and felt shy to ask Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about it. So I 
requested Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad to ask (the Prophet (ﷺ) ) about it. Al-Miqdad asked him and he 
replied, "One has to perform ablution (after it)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 178

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:
Hadith: I asked `Uthman bin `Affan about a person who engaged in intercourse but did no discharge. `Uthman 
replied, "He should perform ablution like the one for an ordinary prayer but he must wash his penis." 
`Uthman added, "I heard it from Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)." I asked `Ali Az-Zubair, Talha and Ubai bin Ka`b 
about it and they, too, gave the same reply. (This order was canceled later on and taking a bath 
became necessary for such cases).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 179

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) sent for a Ansari man who came with water dropping from his head. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 
"Perhaps we have forced you to hurry up, haven't we?" The Ansari replied, "Yes." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
further said, "If you are forced to hurry up (during intercourse) or you do not discharge then ablution 
is due on you (This order was canceled later on, i.e. one has to take a bath).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 180

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Hadith: "When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) departed from `Arafat, he turned towards a mountain pass where he answered 
the call of nature. (After he had finished) I poured water and he performed ablution and then I said to 
him, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Will you offer the prayer?" He replied, "The Musalla (place of the prayer) is 
ahead of you (in Al-Muzdalifa).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 181

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu`ba:
Hadith: I was in the company of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) on one of the journeys and he went out to answer the call of 
nature (and after he finished) I poured water and he performed ablution; he washed his face, forearms 
and passed his wet hand over his head and over the two Khuff (socks made from thick fabric or 
leather).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 182

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Abbas:
Hadith: That he stayed overnight in the house of Maimuna the wife of the Prophet, his aunt. He added : I lay 
on the bed (cushion transversally) while Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and his wife lay in the lengthwise direction of 
the cushion. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) slept till the middle of the night, either a bit before or a bit after it and 
then woke up, rubbing the traces of sleep off his face with his hands. He then, recited the last ten 
verses of Sura Al-`Imran, got up and went to a hanging water-skin. He then Performed the ablution 
from it and it was a perfect ablution, and then stood up to offer the prayer. I, too, got up and did as the 
Prophet had done. Then I went and stood by his side. He placed his right hand on my head and caught 
my right ear and twisted it. He prayed two rak`at then two rak`at and two rak`at and then two rak`at 
and then two rak`at and then two rak`at (separately six times), and finally one rak`a (the witr). Then he 
lay down again in the bed till the Mu'adh-dhin came to him where upon the Prophet (ﷺ) got up, offered a 
two light rak`at prayer and went out and led the Fajr prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 183

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
Hadith: I came to `Aisha the wife of the Prophet (ﷺ) during the solar eclipse. The people were standing and 
offering the prayer and she was also praying. I asked her, "What is wrong with the people?" She 
beckoned with her hand towards the sky and said, "Subhan Allah." I asked her, "Is there a sign?" She 
pointed out, "Yes." So I, too, stood for the prayer till I fell unconscious and later on I poured water on 
my head. After the prayer, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) praised and glorified Allah and said, "Just now I have seen 
something which I never saw before at this place of mine, including Paradise and Hell. I have been 
inspired (and have understood) that you will be put to trials in your graves and these trials will be like 
the trials of Ad-Dajjal, or nearly like it (the sub narrator is not sure of what Asma' said). Angels will 
come to every one of you and ask, 'What do you know about this man?' A believer will reply, 'He is 
Muhammad, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) , and he came to us with self-evident truth and guidance. So we accepted 
his teaching, believed and followed him.' Then the angels will say to him to sleep in peace as they 
have come to know that he was a believer. On the other hand a hypocrite or a doubtful person will 
reply, 'I do not know but heard the people saying something and so I said the same.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 184

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Yahya Al-Mazini:
Hadith: A person asked `Abdullah bin Zaid who was the grandfather of `Amr bin Yahya, "Can you show me 
how Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to perform ablution?" `Abdullah bin Zaid replied in the affirmative and 
asked for water. He poured it on his hands and washed them twice, then he rinsed his mouth thrice and 
washed his nose with water thrice by putting water in it and blowing it out. He washed his face thrice 
and after that he washed his forearms up to the elbows twice and then passed his wet hands over his 
head from its front to its back and vice versa (beginning from the front and taking them to the back of 
his head up to the nape of the neck and then brought them to the front again from where he had 
started) and washed his feet (up to the ankles).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 185

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr:
Hadith: My father saw `Amr bin Abi Hasan asking `Abdullah bin Zaid about the ablution of the Prophet. 
`Abdullah bin Zaid asked for earthenware pot containing water and in front of them performed 
ablution like that of the Prophet (ﷺ) . He poured water from the pot over his hand and washed his hands 
thrice and then he put his hands in the pot and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water 
in it and then blowing it out with three handfuls of water. Again he put his hand in the water and 
washed his face thrice and washed his forearms up to the elbows twice; and then put his hands in the 
water and then passed them over his head by bringing them to the front and then to the rear of the 
head once, and then he washed his feet up to the ankles.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 186

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came to us at noon and water for ablution was brought to him. After he had performed 
ablution, the remaining water was taken by the people and they started smearing their bodies with it 
(as a blessed thing). The Prophet (ﷺ) offered two rak`at of the Zuhr prayer and then two rak`at of the `Asr 
prayer while a short spear (or stick) was there (as a Sutra) in front of him.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 187

Hadith Narrated by: 
Abu Musa said:
Hadith: The 
Prophet asked for a tumbler containing water and washed both his hands and face in it and then threw 
a mouthful of water in the tumbler and said to both of us (Abu Musa and Bilal), "Drink from the 
tumbler and pour some of its water on your faces and chests."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 188

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Shihab:
Hadith: Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi` who was the person on whose face the Prophet (ﷺ) had ejected a mouthful of water 
from his family's well while he was a boy, and `Urwa (on the authority of Al-Miswar and others) who 
testified each other, said, "Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) , performed ablution, his companions were nearly 
fighting for the remains of the water."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 189

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
Hadith: My aunt took me to the Prophet (ﷺ) and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! This son of my sister has got a disease 
in his legs." So he passed his hands on my head and prayed for Allah's blessings for me; then he 
performed ablution and I drank from the remaining water. I stood behind him and saw the seal of 
Prophethood between his shoulders, and it was like the "Zir-al-Hijla" (means the button of a small 
tent, but some said 'egg of a partridge.' etc.)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 190

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr bin Yahya:
Hadith: (on the authority of his father) `Abdullah bin Zaid poured water on his hands from a utensil containing 
water and washed them and then with one handful of water he rinsed his mouth and cleaned his nose 
by putting water in it and then blowing it out. He repeated it thrice. He, then, washed his hands and 
forearms up to the elbows twice and passed wet hands over his head, both forwards and backwards, 
and washed his feet up to the ankles and said, "This is the ablution of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 191

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr bin Yahya:
Hadith: My father said, "I saw `Amr bin Abi Hasan asking `Abdullah bin Zaid about the ablution of the 
Prophet. `Abdullah bin Zaid asked for an earthenware pot containing water and performed ablution in 
front of them. He poured water over his hands and washed them thrice. Then he put his (right) hand in 
the pot and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out thrice 
with three handfuls of water Again he put his hand in the water and washed his face thrice. After that 
he put his hand in the pot and washed his forearms up to the elbows twice and then again put his hand 
in the water and passed wet hands over his head by bringing them to the front and then to the back and 
once more he put his hand in the pot and washed his feet (up to the ankles.)"
Narrated Wuhaib:

That he (the Prophet (ﷺ) in narration 191 above) had passed his wet hands on the head once only.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 192

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Hadith: "During the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) men and women used to perform ablution together."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 193

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came to visit me while I was sick and unconscious. He performed ablution and 
sprinkled the remaining water on me and I became conscious and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! To whom 
will my inheritance go as I have neither ascendants nor descendants?" Then the Divine verses 
regarding Fara'id (inheritance) were revealed.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 194

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: It was the time for prayer, and those whose houses were near got up and went to their people (to 
perform ablution), and there remained some people (sitting). Then a painted stove pot (Mikhdab) 
containing water was brought to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)s The pot was small, not broad enough for one to 
spread one's hand in; yet all the people performed ablution. (The sub narrator said, "We asked Anas, 
'How many persons were you?' Anas replied 'We were eighty or more"). (It was one of the miracles of 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 195

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) asked for a tumbler containing water. He washed his hands and face in it and also 
threw a mouthful of water in it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 196

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Zaid:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came to us and we brought out water for him in a brass pot. He performed 
ablution thus: He washed his face thrice, and his forearms to the elbows twice, then passed his wet 
hands lightly over the head from front to rear and brought them to front again and washed his feet (up 
to the ankles).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 197

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: When the ailment of the Prophet (ﷺ) became aggravated and his disease became severe, he asked his 
wives to permit him to be nursed (treated) in my house. So they gave him the permission. Then the 
Prophet came (to my house) with the support of two men, and his legs were dragging on the ground, 
between `Abbas, and another man." 'Ubaidullah (the sub narrator) said, "I informed `Abdullah bin 
`Abbas of what `Aisha said. Ibn `Abbas said: 'Do you know who was the other man?' I replied in the 
negative. Ibn `Abbas said, 'He was `Ali (bin Abi Talib)." `Aisha further said, "When the Prophet (ﷺ) came 
to my house and his sickness became aggravated he ordered us to pour seven skins full of water on 
him, so that he might give some advice to the people. So he was seated in a Mikhdab (brass tub) 
belonging to Hafsa, the wife of the Prophet. Then, all of us started pouring water on him from the 
water skins till he beckoned to us to stop and that we have done (what he wanted us to do). After that 
he went out to the people."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 198

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr bin Yahya:
Hadith: (on the authority of his father) My uncle used to perform ablution extravagantly and once he asked 
`Abdullah bin Zaid to tell him how he had seen the Prophet (ﷺ) performing ablution. He asked for an 
earthenware pot containing water, and poured water from it on his hands and washed them thrice, and 
then put his hand in the earthenware pot and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in 
it and then blowing it out thrice with one handful of water; he again put his hand in the water and 
took a handful of water and washed his face thrice, then washed his hands up to the elbows twice, and 
took water with his hand, and passed it over his head from front to back and then from back to front, 
and then washed his feet (up to the ankles) and said, "I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) performing ablution in that 
way."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 199

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Thabit:
Hadith: Anas said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) asked for water and a tumbler with a broad base and no so deep, containing a 
small quantity of water, was brought to him whereby he put his fingers in it." Anas further said, ' 
noticed the water springing out from amongst his fingers." Anas added, ' estimated that the people 
who performed ablution with it numbered between seventy to eighty."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 200

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to take a bath with one Sa` up to five Mudds (1 Sa` = [??] Mudds) of water and 
used to perform ablution with one Mudd of water.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 201

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Sa`d bin Abi Waqqas said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) passed wet hands over his Khuffs (socks made from thick 
fabric or leather)." `Abdullah bin `Umar asked `Umar about it. `Umar replied in the affirmative and 
added, "Whenever Sa`d narrates a Hadith from the Prophet, there is no need to ask anyone else about 
it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 202

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu`ba:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went out to answer the call of nature and I followed him with a tumbler 
containing water, and when he finished, I poured water and he performed ablution and passed wet 
hands over his Khuffs (socks made from thick fabric or leather).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 203

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ja`far bin `Amr bin Umaiya Ad-Damri:
Hadith: My father said, "I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) passing wet hands over his Khuffs (socks made from thick fabric or 
leather)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 204

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ja`far bin `Amr:
Hadith: My father said, "I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) passing wet hands over his turban and Khuffs (socks made from 
thick fabric or leather).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 205

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Urwa bin Al-Mughira:
Hadith: My father said, "Once I was in the company of the Prophet (ﷺ) on a journey and I dashed to take off his 
Khuffs (socks made from thick fabric or leather). He ordered me to leave them as he had put them 
after performing ablution. So he passed wet hands over them.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 206

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Abbas:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ate a piece of cooked mutton from the shoulder region and prayed without repeating 
ablution.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 207

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ja`far bin `Amr bin Umaiya:
Hadith: My father said, "I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) taking a piece of (cooked) mutton from the shoulder region and 
then he was called for prayer. He put his knife down and prayed without repeating ablution."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 208

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Suwaid bin Al-Nu`man:
Hadith: In the year of the conquest of Khaibar I went with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) till we reached Sahba, a place near 
Khaibar, where Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) offered the `Asr prayer and asked for food. Nothing but saweeq  
was brought. He ordered it to be moistened with water. He and all of us ate it and the Prophet (ﷺ) got up 
for the evening prayer (Maghrib prayer), rinsed his mouth with water and we did the same, and he 
then prayed without repeating the ablution.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 209

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) ate (a piece of) mutton from the shoulder region and then prayed without repeating the 
ablution.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 210

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) drank milk, rinsed his mouth and said, "It has fat."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 211

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If anyone of you feels drowsy while praying he should go to bed (sleep) till his 
slumber is over because in praying while drowsy one does not know whether one is asking for 
forgiveness or for a bad thing for oneself."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 212

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "If anyone of you feels drowsy while praying, he should sleep till he understands 
what he is saying (reciting).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 213

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr bin `Amir:
Hadith: Anas said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to perform ablution for every prayer." I asked Anas, "What did you used to 
do?' Anas replied, "We used to pray with the same ablution until we break it with Hadath."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 214

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Suwaid bin Nu`man:
Hadith: In the year of the conquest of Khaibar I went with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) till we reached As-Sahba' where 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) led the `Asr prayer and asked for the food. Nothing but saweeq was brought and 
we ate it and drank (water). The Prophet (ﷺ) got up for the (Maghrib) Prayer, rinsed his mouth with water 
and then led the prayer without repeating the ablution.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 215

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Once the Prophet, while passing through one of the graveyards of Medina or Mecca heard the voices 
of two persons who were being tortured in their graves. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "These two persons are 
being tortured not for a major sin (to avoid)." The Prophet (ﷺ) then added, "Yes! (they are being tortured 
for a major sin). Indeed, one of them never saved himself from being soiled with his urine while the 
other used to go about with calumnies (to make enmity between friends). The Prophet (ﷺ) then asked for a 
green leaf of a date-palm tree, broke it into two pieces and put one on each grave. On being asked why 
he had done so, he replied, "I hope that their torture might be lessened, till these get dried."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 216

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) went to answer the call of nature, I used to bring water with which he used to 
clean his private parts.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 217

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) once passed by two graves and said, "These two persons are being tortured not for a 
major sin (to avoid). One of them never saved himself from being soiled with his urine, while the 
other used to go about with calumnies (to make enmity between friends)." The Prophet (ﷺ) then took a 
green leaf of a date-palm tree, split it into (pieces) and fixed one on each grave. They said, "O Allah's 
Apostle! Why have you done so?" He replied, "I hope that their punishment might be lessened till 
these (the pieces of the leaf) become dry." (See the footnote of Hadith 215).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 218

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) saw a Bedouin making water in the mosque and told the people not to disturb him. When 
he finished, the Prophet (ﷺ) asked for some water and poured it over (the urine).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 219

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: A Bedouin stood up and started making water in the mosque. The people caught him but the Prophet (ﷺ) 
ordered them to leave him and to pour a bucket or a tumbler of water over the place where he had 
passed the urine. The Prophet (ﷺ) then said, "You have been sent to make things easy and not to make 
them difficult."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 220

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said as above (219).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 221

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: (the mother of faithful believers) A child was brought to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and it urinated on the 
garment of the Prophet. The Prophet (ﷺ) asked for water and poured it over the soiled place.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 222

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Qais bint Mihsin:
Hadith: I brought my young son, who had not started eating (ordinary food) to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) who took him 
and made him sit in his lap. The child urinated on the garment of the Prophet, so he asked for water 
and poured it over the soiled (area) and did not wash it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 223

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) went to the dumps of some people and passed urine while standing. He then asked 
for water and so I brought it to him and he performed ablution.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 224

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hudhaifa':
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) and I walked till we reached the dumps of some people. He stood, as any one of you 
stands, behind a wall and urinated. I went away, but he beckoned me to come. So I approached him 
and stood near his back till he finished.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 225

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Wail:
Hadith: Abu Musa Al-Ash`ari used to lay great stress on the question of urination and he used to say, "If 
anyone from Bani Israel happened to soil his clothes with urine, he used to cut that portion away." 
Hearing that, Hudhaifa said to Abu Wail, "I wish he (Abu Musa) didn't (lay great stress on that 
matter)." Hudhaifa added, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went to the dumps of some people and urinated while 
standing."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 226

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Asma':
Hadith: A woman came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and said, "If anyone of us gets menses in her clothes then what should 
she do?" He replied, "She should (take hold of the soiled place), rub it and put it in the water and rub it 
in order to remove the traces of blood and then pour water over it. Then she can pray in it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 227

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Fatima bint Abi Hubaish came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I get persistent bleeding 
from the uterus and do not become clean. Shall I give up my prayers?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "No, 
because it is from a blood vessel and not the menses. So when your real menses begins give up your 
prayers and when it has finished wash off the blood (take a bath) and offer your prayers." Hisham (the 
sub narrator) narrated that his father had also said, (the Prophet (ﷺ) told her): "Perform ablution for every 
prayer till the time of the next period comes."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 228

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: I used to wash the traces of Janaba (semen) from the clothes of the Prophet (ﷺ) and he used to go for 
prayers while traces of water were still on it (water spots were still visible).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 229

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sulaiman bin Yasar:
Hadith: I asked `Aisha about the clothes soiled with semen. She replied, "I used to wash it off the clothes of 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and he would go for the prayer while water spots were still visible. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 230

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr bin Maimun:
Hadith: I heard Sulaiman bin Yasar talking about the clothes soiled with semen. He said that `Aisha had said, 
"I used to wash it off the clothes of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and he would go for the prayers while water spots 
were still visible on them.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 231

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated `Aishah:
Hadith: I used 
to wash the semen off the clothes of the
Prophet (ﷺ) and even then I used to notice
one or more spots on them.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 232

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
Hadith: Anas said, "Some people of `Ukl or `Uraina tribe came to Medina and its climate did not suit them. So 
the Prophet (ﷺ) ordered them to go to the herd of (Milch) camels and to drink their milk and urine (as a 
medicine). So they went as directed and after they became healthy, they killed the shepherd of the 
Prophet and drove away all the camels. The news reached the Prophet (ﷺ) early in the morning and he 
sent (men) in their pursuit and they were captured and brought at noon. He then ordered to cut their 
hands and feet (and it was done), and their eyes were branded with heated pieces of iron, They were 
put in 'Al-Harra' and when they asked for water, no water was given to them." Abu Qilaba said, 
"Those people committed theft and murder, became infidels after embracing Islam and fought against 
Allah and His Apostle ."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 233

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Prior to the construction of the mosque, the Prophet (ﷺ) offered the prayers at sheep-folds.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 234

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was asked regarding ghee (cooking butter) in which a mouse had fallen. He said, 
"Take out the mouse and throw away the ghee around it and use the rest."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 235

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) was asked regarding ghee in which a mouse had fallen. He said, "Take out the mouse and 
throw away the ghee around it (and use the rest.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 236

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "A wound which a Muslim receives in Allah's cause will appear on the Day of 
Resurrection as it was at the time of infliction; blood will be flowing from the wound and its color will 
be that of the blood but will smell like musk."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 237

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "We (Muslims) are the last (people to come in the world) but (will be) the 
foremost (on the Day of Resurrection)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 238

Hadith Narrated by: 
The same narrator said that the Prophet (ﷺ) had said:
Hadith: 
"You should not pass urine in stagnant water which is not flowing then (you may need to) wash in it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 239

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: While Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was prostrating (as stated below).


Narrated `Abdullah bin Mas`ud:

Once the Prophet (ﷺ) was offering prayers at the Ka`ba. Abu Jahl was sitting with some of his 
companions. One of them said to the others, "Who amongst you will bring the Abdominal contents 
(intestines, etc.) of a camel of Bani so and so and put it on the back of Muhammad, when he 
prostrates?" The most unfortunate of them got up and brought it. He waited till the Prophet (ﷺ) prostrated 
and then placed it on his back between his shoulders. I was watching but could not do any thing. I 
wish I had some people with me to hold out against them. They started laughing and falling on one 
another. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was in prostration and he did not lift his head up till Fatima (Prophet's 
daughter) came and threw that (camel's Abdominal contents) away from his back. He raised his head 
and said thrice, "O Allah! Punish Quraish." So it was hard for Abu Jahl and his companions when the 
Prophet invoked Allah against them as they had a conviction that the prayers and invocations were 
accepted in this city (Mecca). The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "O Allah! Punish Abu Jahl, `Utba bin Rabi`a, Shaiba 
bin Rabi`a, Al-Walid bin `Utba, Umaiya bin Khalaf, and `Uqba bin Al Mu'it [??] (and he mentioned 
the seventh whose name I cannot recall). By Allah in Whose Hands my life is, I saw the dead bodies 
of those persons who were counted by Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) in the Qalib (one of the wells) of Badr.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 240

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) once spat in his clothes.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 241

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "All drinks that produce intoxication are Haram (forbidden to drink).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 242

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Hazim:
Hadith: Sahl bin Sa`d As-Sa`idi, was asked by the people, "With what was the wound of the Prophet (ﷺ) treated? 
Sahl replied, "None remains among the people living who knows that better than I. `Ali [??] used to 
bring water in his shield and Fatima used to wash the blood off his face. Then straw mat was burnt 
and the wound was filled with it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 243

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Burda:
Hadith: My father said, "I came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and saw him carrying a Siwak in his hand and cleansing his 
teeth, saying, 'U' U'," as if he was retching while the Siwak was in his mouth."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 244

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) got up at night, he used to clean his mouth with Siwak.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 245

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I dreamt that I was cleaning my teeth with a Siwak and two persons came to me. One of them was older than the other and I gave the Siwak to the younger. I was told that I should give it to the older and so I did."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 246

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara 'bin `Azib:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said to me, "Whenever you go to bed perform ablution like that for the prayer, lie or your 
right side and say, "Allahumma aslamtu wajhi ilaika, wa fauwadtu `Amri ilaika, wa alja'tu Zahri ilaika 
raghbatan wa rahbatan ilaika. La Malja'a wa la manja minka illa ilaika. Allahumma amantu 
bikitabika-l-ladhi anzalta wa bina-biyika-l ladhi arsalta" (O Allah! I surrender to You and entrust all 
my affairs to You and depend upon You for Your Blessings both with hope and fear of You. There is 
no fleeing from You, and there is no place of protection and safety except with You O Allah! I believe 
in Your Book (the Qur'an) which You have revealed and in Your Prophet (Muhammad) whom You 
have sent). Then if you die on that very night, you will die with faith (i.e. or the religion of Islam). Let 
the aforesaid words be your last utterance (before sleep)." I repeated it before the Prophet (ﷺ) and when I 
reached "Allahumma amantu bikitabika-l-ladhi anzalta (O Allah I believe in Your Book which You 
have revealed)." I said, "Wa-rasulika (and your Apostle)." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "No, (but say): 
'Wanabiyika-l-ladhi arsalta (Your Prophet whom You have sent), instead."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 247

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) took a bath after Janaba he started by washing his hands and then performed 
ablution like that for the prayer. After that he would put his fingers in water and move the roots of his 
hair with them, and then pour three handfuls of water over his head and then pour water all over his 
body.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 248

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) performed ablution like that for the prayer but did not wash 
his feet. He washed off the discharge from his private parts and then poured water over his body. He 
withdrew his feet from that place (the place where he took the bath) and then washed them. And that 
was his way of taking the bath of Janaba.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 249

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) and I used to take a bath from a single pot called 'Faraq'.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 250

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Salama:
Hadith: `Aisha's brother and I went to `Aisha and he asked her about the bath of the Prophet. She brought a 
pot containing about a Sa` of water and took a bath and poured it over her head and at that time there 
was a screen between her and us.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 251

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Ja`far:
Hadith: While I and my father were with Jabir bin `Abdullah, some people asked him about taking a bath. He 
replied, "A Sa` of water is sufficient for you." A man said, "A Sa` is not sufficient for me." Jabir said, 
"A Sa` was sufficient for one who had more hair than you and was better than you (meaning the 
Prophet)." And then Jabir (put on) his garment and led the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 252

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) and Maimuna used to take a bath from a single pot.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 253

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jubair bin Mut`im:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "As for me, I pour water three times on my head." And he pointed with both his 
hands.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 254

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to pour water three times on his head.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 255

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Ja`far:
Hadith: Jabir bin `Abdullah said to me, "Your cousin (Hasan bin Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiya) came to me 
and asked about the bath of Janaba. I replied, 'The Prophet (ﷺ) uses to take three handfuls of water, pour 
them on his head and then pour more water over his body.' Al-Hasan said to me, 'I am a hairy man.' I 
replied, 'The Prophet (ﷺ) had more hair than you'. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 256

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: I placed water for the bath of the Prophet. He washed his hands twice or thrice and then poured water 
on his left hand and washed his private parts. He rubbed his hands over the earth (and cleaned them), 
rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out, washed his face and both 
forearms and then poured water over his body. Then he withdrew from that place and washed his feet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 257

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) took the bath of Janaba (sexual relation or wet dream) he asked for the Hilab or 
some other scent. He used to take it in his hand, rub it first over the right side of his head and then 
over the left and then rub the middle of his head with both hands.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 258

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: I placed water for the bath of the Prophet (ﷺ) and he poured water with his right hand on his left and 
washed them. Then he washed his private parts and rubbed his hands on the ground, washed them 
with water, rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out, washed his 
face and poured water on his head. He withdrew from that place and washed his feet. A piece of cloth 
(towel) was given to him but he did not use it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 259

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) took the bath of Janaba. (sexual relation or wet dream). He first cleaned his private parts 
with his hand, and then rubbed it (that hand) on the wall (earth) and washed it. Then he performed 
ablution like that for the prayer, and after the bath he washed his feet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 260

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) and I used to take a bath from a single pot of water and our hands used to go in the pot 
after each other in turn.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 261

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) took a bath of Janaba, he washed his hands first.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 262

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) and I used to take a bath from a single pot of water after Janaba.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 263

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) and one of his wives used to take a bath from a single pot of water. (Shu`ba added to 
Anas' Statement "After the Janaba").
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 264

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: I placed water for the bath of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and he poured water over his hands and washed them 
twice or thrice; then he poured water with his right hand over his left and washed his private parts 
(with his left hand). He rubbed his hand over the earth and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by 
putting water in it and blowing it out. After that he washed his face, both fore arms and head thrice 
and then poured water over his body. He withdrew from that place and washed his feet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 265

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna bint Al-Harith:
Hadith: I placed water for the bath of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and put a screen. He poured water over his hands, and 
washed them once or twice. (The sub-narrator added that he did not remember if she had said thrice or 
not). Then he poured water with his right hand over his left one and washed his private parts. He 
rubbed his hand over the earth or the wall and washed it. He rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by 
putting water in it and blowing it out. He washed his face, forearms and head. He poured water over 
his body and then withdrew from that place and washed his feet. I presented him a piece of cloth 
(towel) and he pointed with his hand (that he does not want it) and did not take it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 266

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Muntathir:
Hadith: on the authority of his father that he had asked `Aisha (about the Hadith of Ibn `Umar). She said, 
"May Allah be Merciful to Abu `Abdur-Rahman. I used to put scent on Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and he used to 
go round his wives, and in the morning he assumed the Ihram, and the fragrance of scent was still 
coming out from his body."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 267

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Qatada:
Hadith: Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to visit all his wives in a round, during the day and night and 
they were eleven in number." I asked Anas, "Had the Prophet (ﷺ) the strength for it?" Anas replied, "We 
used to say that the Prophet (ﷺ) was given the strength of thirty (men)." And Sa`id said on the authority of 
Qatada that Anas had told him about nine wives only (not eleven).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 268

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ali:
Hadith: I used to get emotional urethral discharge frequently. Being the son-in-law of the Prophet (ﷺ) I requested 
a man to ask him about it. So the man asked the Prophet (ﷺ) about it. The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "Perform 
ablution after washing your organ (penis)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 269

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Muntathir:
Hadith: on the authority of his father that he had asked `Aisha about the saying of Ibn `Umar (i.e. he did not 
like to be a Muhrim while the smell of scent was still coming from his body). `Aisha said, "I scented 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and he went round (had sexual intercourse with) all his wives, and in the morning he 
was Muhrim (after taking a bath)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 270

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: It is as if I am just looking at the glitter of scent in the parting of the Prophet's head hair while he was 
a Muhrim.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 271

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hisham bin `Urwa:
Hadith: (on the authority of his father) `Aisha said, "Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) took the bath of Janaba, he 
cleaned his hands and performed ablution like that for prayer and then took a bath and rubbed his hair, 
till he felt that the whole skin of the head had become wet, then he would pour water thrice and wash 
the rest of the body." `Aisha further said, "I and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to take a bath from a single 
water container, from which we took water simultaneously."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 272, 273

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: Water was placed for the ablution of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) after Janaba. He poured water with his right hand 
over his left twice or thrice and then washed his private parts and rubbed his hand on the earth or on a 
wall twice or thrice and then rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting water in it and then 
blowing it out and then washed his face and forearms and poured water over his head and washed his 
body. Then he shifted from that place and washed his feet. I brought a piece of cloth, but he did not 
take it and removed the traces of water from his body with his hand."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 274

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Once the call (Iqama) for the prayer was announced and the rows were straightened. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
came out; and when he stood up at his Musalla, he remembered that he was Junub. Then he ordered us 
to stay at our places and went to take a bath and then returned with water dropping from his head. He 
said, "Allahu-Akbar", and we all offered the prayer with him.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 275

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: I placed water for the bath of the Prophet (ﷺ) and screened him with a garment. He poured water over his 
hands and washed them. After that he poured water with his right hand over his left and washed his 
private parts, rubbed his hands with earth and washed them, rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by 
putting water in it and then blowing it out and then washed his face and forearms. He poured water 
over his head and body. He then shifted from that place and washed his feet. I gave him a piece of 
cloth but he did not take it and came out removing the water (from his body) with both his hands.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 276

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: Whenever any one of us was Junub, she poured water over her head thrice with both her hands and 
then rubbed the right side of her head with one hand and rubbed the left side of the head with the other 
hand.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 277

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'The (people of) Bani Israel used to take bath naked (all together) looking at each 
other. The Prophet (ﷺ) Moses used to take a bath alone. They said, 'By Allah! Nothing prevents Moses 
from taking a bath with us except that he has a scrotal hernia.' So once Moses went out to take a bath 
and put his clothes over a stone and then that stone ran away with his clothes. Moses followed that 
stone saying, "My clothes, O stone! My clothes, O stone! till the people of Bani Israel saw him and 
said, 'By Allah, Moses has got no defect in his body. Moses took his clothes and began to beat the 
stone." Abu Huraira added, "By Allah! There are still six or seven marks present on the stone from 
that excessive beating."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 278

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When the Prophet (ﷺ) Job (Aiyub) was taking a bath naked, 
golden locusts began to fall on him. Job started collecting them in his clothes. His Lord addressed 
him, 'O Job! Haven't I given you enough so that you are not in need of them.' Job replied, 'Yes!' By 
Your Honor (power)! But I cannot dispense with Your Blessings.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 279

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Hani bint Abi Talib:
Hadith: I went to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) in the year of the conquest of Mecca and found him taking a bath while 
Fatima was screening him. The Prophet (ﷺ) asked, "Who is it?" I replied, "I am Um-Hani."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 280

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: I screened the Prophet (ﷺ) while he was taking a bath of Janaba. He washed his hands, poured water from 
his right hand over his left and washed his private parts. Then he rubbed his hand over a wall or the 
earth, and performed ablution similar to that for the prayer but did not wash his feet. Then he poured 
water over his body, shifted from that place, and washed his feet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 281

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um-Salama:
Hadith: (the mother of the believers) Um Sulaim, the wife of Abu Talha, came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said, "O 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Verily Allah is not shy of (telling you) the truth. Is it necessary for a woman to take a 
bath after she has a wet dream (nocturnal sexual discharge)?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "Yes, if she 
notices a discharge."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 282

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) came across me in one of the streets of Medina and at that time I was Junub. So I slipped 
away from him and went to take a bath. On my return the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "O Abu Huraira! Where have 
you been?" I replied, "I was Junub, so I disliked to sit in your company." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Subhan 
Allah! A believer never becomes impure."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 283

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to visit all his wives in one night and he had nine wives at that time.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 284

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came across me and I was Junub. He took my hand and I went along with him till he 
sat down I slipped away, went home and took a bath. When I came back, he was still sitting there. He 
then said to me, "O Abu Huraira! Where have you been?' I told him about it. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 
"Subhan Allah! O Abu Huraira! A believer never becomes impure."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 285

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Salama:
Hadith: I asked `Aisha "Did the Prophet (ﷺ) use to sleep while he was Junub?" She replied, "Yes, but he used to 
perform ablution (before going to bed).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 286

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Hadith: I asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) "Can any one of us sleep while he is Junub?" He replied, "Yes, if he performs 
ablution, he can sleep while he is Junub."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 287

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) intended to sleep while he was Junub, he used to wash his private parts and 
perform ablution like that for the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 288

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: `Umar asked the Prophet (ﷺ) "Can anyone of us sleep while he is Junub?" He replied, "Yes, if he performs 
ablution."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 289

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: `Umar bin Al-Khattab told Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), "I became Junub at night." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, 
"Perform ablution after washing your private parts and then sleep."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 290

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hisham:
Hadith: as the following Hadith 290.
Narrated Abu Huraira:

The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When a man sits in between the four parts of a woman and did the sexual 
intercourse with her, bath becomes compulsory."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 291

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
Hadith: I asked `Uthman bin `Affan about a man who engaged in the sexual intercourse with his wife but did 
not discharge. `Uthman replied, "He should perform ablution like that for the prayer after washing his 
private parts." `Uthman added, "I heard that from Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)." I asked `Ali bin Abi Talib, Az- 
Zubair bin Al-`Awwam, Talha bin 'Ubaidullah and Ubai bin Ka`b and they gave the same reply. (Abu 
Aiyub said that he had heard that from Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ) (This order was canceled later on so one has 
to take a bath. See, Hadith No. 180).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 292

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ubai bin Ka`b:
Hadith: I asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about a man who engages in sexual intercourse with his wife but does not 
discharge. He replied, "He should wash the parts which comes in contact with the private parts of the 
woman, perform ablution and then pray." (Abu `Abdullah said, "Taking a bath is safer and is the last 
order.")
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 293

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Qasim:
Hadith: `Aisha said, "We set out with the sole intention of performing Hajj and when we reached Sarif, (a 
place six miles from Mecca) I got my menses. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came to me while I was weeping. He 
said 'What is the matter with you? Have you got your menses?' I replied, 'Yes.' He said, 'This is a thing 
which Allah has ordained for the daughters of Adam. So do what all the pilgrims do with the 
exception of the Tawaf (Circumambulation) round the Ka`ba." `Aisha added, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
sacrificed cows on behalf of his wives."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 294

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: While in menses, I used to comb the hair of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 295

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Urwa:
Hadith: A person asked me, "Can a woman in menses serve me? And can a Junub woman come close to me?" 
I replied, "All this is easy for me. All of them can serve me, and there is no harm for any other person 
to do the same. `Aisha told me that she used to comb the hair of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) while she was in her 
menses, and he was in I`tikaf (in the mosque). He would bring his head near her in her room and she 
would comb his hair, while she used to be in her menses."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 296

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to lean on my lap and recite Qur'an while I was in menses.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 297

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Salama:
Hadith: While I was laying with the Prophet (ﷺ) under a single woolen sheet, I got the menses. I slipped away and 
put on the clothes for menses. He said, "Have you got "Nifas" (menses)?" I replied, "Yes." He then 
called me and made me lie with him under the same sheet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 298

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) and I used to take a bath from a single pot while we were Junub. During the menses, he 
used to order me to put on an Izar (dress worn below the waist) and used to fondle me. While in 
I`tikaf, he used to bring his head near me and I would wash it while I used to be in my periods 
(menses).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 299, 300, 301

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad:
Hadith: (on the authority of his father) `Aisha said: "Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) wanted to fondle anyone of us 
during her periods (menses), he used to order her to put on an Izar and start fondling her." `Aisha 
added, "None of you could control his sexual desires as the Prophet (ﷺ) could."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 302

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: When ever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) wanted to fondle any of his wives during the periods (menses), he used to 
ask her to wear an Izar.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 303

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went out to the Musalla (to offer the prayer) of `Id-al-Adha or Al-Fitr prayer. 
Then he passed by the women and said, "O women! Give alms, as I have seen that the majority of the 
dwellers of Hell-fire were you (women)." They asked, "Why is it so, O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ?" He replied, 
"You curse frequently and are ungrateful to your husbands. I have not seen anyone more deficient in 
intelligence and religion than you. A cautious sensible man could be led astray by some of you." The 
women asked, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! What is deficient in our intelligence and religion?" He said, "Is not 
the evidence of two women equal to the witness of one man?" They replied in the affirmative. He 
said, "This is the deficiency in her intelligence. Isn't it true that a woman can neither pray nor fast 
during her menses?" The women replied in the affirmative. He said, "This is the deficiency in her 
religion."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 304

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: We set out with the Prophet (ﷺ) for Hajj and when we reached Sarif I got my menses. When the Prophet (ﷺ) 
came to me, I was weeping. He asked, "Why are you weeping?" I said, "I wish if I had not performed 
Hajj this year." He asked, "May be that you got your menses?" I replied, "Yes." He then said, "This is 
the thing which Allah has ordained for all the daughters of Adam. So do what all the pilgrims do 
except that you do not perform the Tawaf round the Ka`ba till you are clean."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 305

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Fatima bint Abi Hubaish said to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I do not become clean (from 
bleeding). Shall I give up my prayers?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied: "No, because it is from a blood vessel 
and not the menses. So when the real menses begins give up your prayers and when it (the period) has 
finished wash the blood off your body (take a bath) and offer your prayers."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 306

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr:
Hadith: A woman asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! What should we do, if the blood of menses falls 
on our clothes?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "If the blood of menses falls on the garment of anyone of 
you, she must take hold of the blood spot, rub it, and wash it with water and then pray in (with it).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 307

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Whenever anyone of us got her menses, she, on becoming clean, used to take hold of the blood spot 
and rub the blood off her garment, and pour water over it and wash that portion thoroughly and 
sprinkle water over the rest of the garment. After that she would pray in (with) it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 308

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Once one of the wives of the Prophet (ﷺ) did I`tikaf along with him and she was getting bleeding in 
between her periods. She used to see the blood (from her private parts) and she would perhaps put a 
dish under her for the blood. (The sub-narrator `Ikrima added, `Aisha once saw the liquid of safflower 
and said, "It looks like what so and so used to have.")
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 309

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: "One of the wives of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) joined him in I`tikaf and she noticed blood and yellowish 
discharge (from her private parts) and put a dish under her when she prayed."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 310

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: One of the mothers of the faithful believers (i.e. the wives of the Prophet (ﷺ) ) did I`tikaf while she was 
having bleeding in between her periods.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 311

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: None of us had more than a single garment and we used to have our menses while wearing it. 
Whenever it got soiled with blood of menses we used to apply saliva to the blood spot and rub off the 
blood with our nails.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 312

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um-`Atiya:
Hadith: We were forbidden to mourn for a dead person for more than three days except in the case of a 
husband for whom mourning was allowed for four months and ten days. (During that time) we were 
not allowed to put kohl (Antimony eye power) in our eyes or to use perfumes or to put on colored 
clothes except a dress made of `Asr (a kind of Yemen cloth, very coarse and rough). We were allowed 
very light perfumes at the time of taking a bath after menses and also we were forbidden to go with 
the funeral procession .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 313

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: A woman asked the Prophet (ﷺ) about the bath which is taken after finishing from the menses. The Prophet (ﷺ) 
told her what to do and said, "Purify yourself with a piece of cloth scented with musk." The woman 
asked, "How shall I purify myself with it" He said, "Subhan Allah! Purify yourself (with it)." I pulled 
her to myself and said, "Rub the place soiled with blood with it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 314

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: An Ansari woman asked the Prophet (ﷺ) how to take a bath after finishing from the menses. He replied, 
"Take a piece a cloth perfumed with musk and clean the private parts with it thrice." The Prophet (ﷺ) felt 
shy and turned his face. So I pulled her to me and told her what the Prophet (ﷺ) meant.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 315

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: In the last Hajj of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I assumed the Ihram for Hajj along with Allah Apostle. I was one of 
those who intended Tamattu` (to perform Hajj and `Umra) and did not take the Hadi (animal for 
sacrifice) with me. I got my menses and was not clean till the night of `Arafa I said, "O Allah's 
Apostle! It is the night of the day of `Arafat and I intended to perform the Hajj Tamattu` with `Umra. 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) told me to undo my hair and comb it and to postpone the `Umra. I did the same and 
completed the Hajj. On the night of Al-Hasba (i.e. place outside Mecca where the pilgrims go after 
finishing all the ceremonies of Hajj at Mina) he (the Prophet) ordered `Abdur Rahman (`Aisha's brother) 
to take me to at-Tan`im to assume the lhram for `Umra in lieu of that of Hajj-at-Tamattu` which I had 
intended to perform.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 316

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: On the 1st of Dhul-Hijja we set out with the intention of performing Hajj. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Any 
one who likes to assume the Ihram for `Umra he can do so. Had I not brought the Hadi with me, I 
would have assumed the Ihram for `Umra. "Some of us assumed the Ihram for `Umra while the others 
assumed the Ihram for Hajj. I was one of those who assumed the Ihram for `Umra. I got menses and 
kept on menstruating until the day of `Arafat and complained of that to the Prophet. He told me to 
postpone my `Umra, undo and comb my hair, and to assume the Ihram of Hajj and I did so. On the 
night of Hasba, he sent my brother `Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr with me to at-Tan`im, where I 
assumed the Ihram for `Umra in lieu of the previous one. Hisham said, "For that (`Umra) no Hadi, 
fasting or alms were required.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 317

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "At every womb Allah appoints an angel who says, 'O Lord! A drop of semen, O 
Lord! A clot. O Lord! A little lump of flesh." Then if Allah wishes (to complete) its creation, the angel 
asks, (O Lord!) Will it be a male or female, a wretched or a blessed, and how much will his provision 
be? And what will his age be?' So all that is written while the child is still in the mother's womb."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 318

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Urwa:
Hadith: `Aisha said, "We set out with the Prophet (ﷺ) in his last Hajj. Some of us intended to perform `Umra 
while others Hajj. When we reached Mecca, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, 'Those who had assumed the lhram 
for `Umra and had not brought the Hadi should finish his lhram and whoever had assumed the Ihram 
for `Umra and brought the Hadi should not finish the Ihram till he has slaughtered his Hadi and 
whoever had assumed the lhram for Hajj should complete his Hajj." `Aisha further said, "I got my 
periods (menses) and kept on menstruating till the day of `Arafat, and I had assumed the Ihram for 
`Umra only (Tamattu`). The Prophet (ﷺ) ordered me to undo and comb my head hair and assume the 
lhram for Hajj only and leave the `Umra. I did the same till I completed the Hajj. Then the Prophet (ﷺ) 
sent `Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakr with me and ordered me to perform `Umra from at-Tan`im in lieu 
of the missed `Umra."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 319

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Fatima bint Abi Hubaish used to have bleeding in between the periods, so she asked the Prophet (ﷺ) about 
it. He replied, "The bleeding is from a blood vessel and not the menses. So give up the prayers when 
the (real) menses begins and when it has finished, take a bath and start praying."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 320

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mu`adha:
Hadith: A woman asked `Aisha, "Should I offer the prayers that which I did not offer because of menses" 
`Aisha said, "Are you from the Huraura' (a town in Iraq?) We were with the Prophet (ﷺ) and used to get 
our periods but he never ordered us to offer them (the Prayers missed during menses)." `Aisha perhaps 
said, "We did not offer them."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 321

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama:
Hadith: Um-Salama said, "I got my menses while I was lying with the Prophet (ﷺ) under a woolen sheet. So I 
slipped away, took the clothes for menses and put them on. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, 'Have you got your 
menses?' I replied, 'Yes.' Then he called me and took me with him under the woolen sheet." Um 
Salama further said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to kiss me while he was fasting. The Prophet (ﷺ) and I used to 
take the bath of Janaba from a single pot."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 322

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Salama:
Hadith: While I was lying with the Prophet (ﷺ) under a woolen sheet, I got my menses. I slipped away and put on 
the clothes for menses. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Have you got your menses?" I replied, "Yes." He called me 
and I slept with him under the woolen sheet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 323

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aiyub:
Hadith: Hafsa said, 'We used to forbid our young women to go out for the two `Id prayers. A woman came 
and stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf and she narrated about her sister whose husband took part in 
twelve holy battles along with the Prophet (ﷺ) and her sister was with her husband in six (out of these 
twelve). She (the woman's sister) said, "We used to treat the wounded, look after the patients and once 
I asked the Prophet, 'Is there any harm for any of us to stay at home if she doesn't have a veil?' He 
said, 'She should cover herself with the veil of her companion and should participate in the good deeds 
and in the religious gathering of the Muslims.' When Um `Atiya came I asked her whether she had 
heard it from the Prophet. She replied, "Yes. May my father be sacrificed for him (the Prophet)! 
(Whenever she mentioned the Prophet (ﷺ) she used to say, 'May my father be sacrificed for him) I have 
heard the Prophet (ﷺ) saying, 'The unmarried young virgins and the mature girl who stay often screened or 
the young unmarried virgins who often stay screened and the menstruating women should come out 
and participate in the good deeds as well as the religious gathering of the faithful believers but the 
menstruating women should keep away from the Musalla (praying place).' " Hafsa asked Um `Atiya 
surprisingly, "Do you say the menstruating women?" She replied, "Doesn't a menstruating woman 
attend `Arafat (Hajj) and such and such (other deeds)?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 324

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Fatima bint Abi Hubaish asked the Prophet, "I got persistent bleeding (in between the periods) and do 
not become clean. Shall I give up prayers?" He replied, "No, this is from a blood vessel. Give up the 
prayers only for the days on which you usually get the menses and then take a bath and offer your 
prayers."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 325

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um `Atiya:
Hadith: We never considered yellowish discharge as a thing of importance (as menses).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 326

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: (the wife of the Prophet) Um Habiba got bleeding in between the periods for seven years. She asked 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about it. He ordered her to take a bath (after the termination of actual periods) and 
added that it was (from) a blood vessel. So she used to take a bath for every prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 327

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: (the wife of the Prophet) I told Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) that Safiya bint Huyai had got her menses. He said, 
"She will probably delay us. Did she perform Tawaf (Al-Ifada) with you?" We replied, "Yes." On that 
the Prophet (ﷺ) told her to depart.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 328

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: A woman is allowed to leave (go back home) if she gets menses (after Tawaf-Al-Ifada). Ibn `Umar 
formerly used to say that she should not leave but later on I heard him saying, "She may leave, since 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) gave them the permission to leave (after Tawaf-Al-Ifada)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 329, 330

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said to me, "Give up the prayer when your menses begin and when it has finished, wash 
the blood off your body (take a bath) and start praying."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 331

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Samura bin Jundub:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) offered the funeral prayer for the dead body of a woman who died during delivery 
(i.e. childbirth) and he stood by the middle of her body.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 332

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: (the wife of the Prophet) During my menses, I never prayed, but used to sit on the mat beside the 
mosque of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). He used to offer the prayer on his sheet and in prostration some of his 
clothes used to touch me."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 333

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: (the wife of the Prophet) We set out with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) on one of his journeys till we reached Al- 
Baida' or Dhatul-Jaish, a necklace of mine was broken (and lost). Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stayed there to 
search for it, and so did the people along with him. There was no water at that place, so the people 
went to Abu- Bakr As-Siddiq and said, "Don't you see what `Aisha has done? She has made Allah's 
Apostle and the people stay where there is no water and they have no water with them." Abu Bakr 
came while Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was sleeping with his head on my thigh, He said, to me: "You have 
detained Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and the people where there is no water and they have no water with them. 
So he admonished me and said what Allah wished him to say and hit me on my flank with his hand. 
Nothing prevented me from moving (because of pain) but the position of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) on my thigh. 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) got up when dawn broke and there was no water. So Allah revealed the Divine Verses 
of Tayammum. So they all performed Tayammum. Usaid bin Hudair said, "O the family of Abu Bakr! 
This is not the first blessing of yours." Then the camel on which I was riding was caused to move 
from its place and the necklace was found beneath it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 334

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I have been given five things which were not given to any one else before me. 
-1. Allah made me victorious by awe, (by His frightening my enemies) for a distance of one month's 
journey. 
-2. The earth has been made for me (and for my followers) a place for praying and a thing to perform 
Tayammum, therefore anyone of my followers can pray wherever the time of a prayer is due. 
-3. The booty has been made Halal (lawful) for me yet it was not lawful for anyone else before me. 
-4. I have been given the right of intercession (on the Day of Resurrection). 
-5. Every Prophet used to be sent to his nation only but I have been sent to all mankind.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 335

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Urwa's father:
Hadith: Aisha said, "I borrowed a necklace from Asma' and it was lost. So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) sent a man to 
search for it and he found it. Then the time of the prayer became due and there was no water. They 
prayed (without ablution) and informed Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about it, so the verse of Tayammum was 
revealed." Usaid bin Hudair said to `Aisha, "May Allah reward you. By Allah, whenever anything 
happened which you did not like, Allah brought good for you and for the Muslims in that."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 336

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Juhaim Al-Ansari:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) came from the direction of Bir Jamal. A man met him and greeted him. But he did not 
return back the greeting till he went to a (mud) wall and wiped his face and hands with its dust 
(performed Tayammum) and then returned back the greeting.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 337

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdur Rahman bin Abza [??]:
Hadith: A man came to `Umar bin Al-Khattab and said, "I became Junub but no water was available." 
`Ammar bin Yasir said to `Umar, "Do you remember that you and I (became Junub while both of us) 
were together on a journey and you didn't pray but I rolled myself on the ground and prayed? I 
informed the Prophet (ﷺ) about it and he said, 'It would have been sufficient for you to do like this.' The 
Prophet then stroked lightly the earth with his hands and then blew off the dust and passed his hands 
over his face and hands."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 338

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sa`id bin `Abdur Rahman bin Abza:
Hadith: (on the authority of his father who said) `Ammar said so (the above Statement). And Shu`ba stroked 
lightly the earth with his hands and brought them close to his mouth (blew off the dust) and passed 
them over his face and then the backs of his hands. `Ammar said, "Ablution (meaning Tayammum 
here) is sufficient for a Muslim if water is not available."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 339

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdur Rahman bin Abza:
Hadith: that while he was in the company of `Umar, `Ammar said to `Umar, "We were in a detachment and 
became Junub and I blew the dust off my hands (performed the rolling over the earth and prayed.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 340

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdur Rahman bin Abza:
Hadith: `Ammar said to `Umar "I rolled myself in the dust and came to the Prophet (ﷺ) who said, 'Passing dusted 
hands over the face and the backs of the hands is sufficient for you.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 341

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ammar:
Hadith: As above.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 342

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ammar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) stroked the earth with his hands and then passed them over his face and the backs of his 
hands (while demonstrating Tayammum).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 343

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Imran:
Hadith: Once we were traveling with the Prophet (ﷺ) and we carried on traveling till the last part of the night and 
then we (halted at a place) and slept (deeply). There is nothing sweeter than sleep for a traveler in the 
last part of the night. So it was only the heat of the sun that made us to wake up and the first to wake 
up was so and so, then so and so and then so and so (the narrator `Auf said that Abu Raja' had told 
him their names but he had forgotten them) and the fourth person to wake up was `Umar bin Al- 
Khattab. And whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) used to sleep, nobody would wake up him till he himself used to 
get up as we did not know what was happening (being revealed) to him in his sleep. So, `Umar got up 
and saw the condition of the people, and he was a strict man, so he said, "Allahu Akbar" and raised his 
voice with Takbir, and kept on saying loudly till the Prophet (ﷺ) got up because of it. When he got up, the 
people informed him about what had happened to them. He said, "There is no harm (or it will not be 
harmful). Depart!" So they departed from that place, and after covering some distance the Prophet (ﷺ) 
stopped and asked for some water to perform the ablution. So he performed the ablution and the call 
for the prayer was pronounced and he led the people in prayer. After he finished from the prayer, he 
saw a man sitting aloof who had not prayed with the people. He asked, "O so and so! What has 
prevented you from praying with us?" He replied, "I am Junub and there is no water. " The Prophet (ﷺ) 
said, "Perform Tayammum with (clean) earth and that is sufficient for you." 
Then the Prophet (ﷺ) proceeded on and the people complained to him of thirst. Thereupon he got down 
and called a person (the narrator `Auf added that Abu Raja' had named him but he had forgotten) and 
`Ali, and ordered them to go and bring water. So they went in search of water and met a woman who 
was sitting on her camel between two bags of water. They asked, "Where can we find water?" She 
replied, "I was there (at the place of water) this hour yesterday and my people are behind me." They 
requested her to accompany them. She asked, "Where?" They said, "To Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ." She said, 
"Do you mean the man who is called the Sabi, (with a new religion)?" They replied, "Yes, the same 
person. So come along." They brought her to the Prophet (ﷺ) and narrated the whole story. He said, "Help 
her to dismount." The Prophet (ﷺ) asked for a pot, then he opened the mouths of the bags and poured 
some water into the pot. Then he closed the big openings of the bags and opened the small ones and 
the people were called upon to drink and water their animals. 
So they all watered their animals and they (too) all quenched their thirst and also gave water to others 
and last of all the Prophet (ﷺ) gave a pot full of water to the person who was Junub and told him to pour it 
over his body. The woman was standing and watching all that which they were doing with her water. 
By Allah, when her water bags were returned the looked like as if they were more full (of water) than 
they had been before (Miracle of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)) Then the Prophet (ﷺ) ordered us to collect something 
for her; so dates, flour and Sawiq were collected which amounted to a good meal that was put in a 
piece of cloth. She was helped to ride on her camel and that cloth full of foodstuff was also placed in 
front of her and then the Prophet (ﷺ) said to her, "We have not taken your water but Allah has given water 
to us." She returned home late. Her relatives asked her: "O so and so what has delayed you?" She said, 
"A strange thing! Two men met me and took me to the man who is called the Sabi' and he did such 
and such a thing. By Allah, he is either the greatest magician between this and this (gesturing with her 
index and middle fingers raising them towards the sky indicating the heaven and the earth) or he is 
Allah's true Apostle." 
Afterwards the Muslims used to attack the pagans around her abode but never touched her village. 
One day she said to her people, "I think that these people leave you purposely. Have you got any 
inclination to Islam?" They obeyed her and all of them embraced Islam. 
Abu `Abdullah said: The word Saba'a means "The one who has deserted his old religion and embraced 
a new religion." Abul 'Ailya [??] said, "The S`Abis are a sect of people of the Scripture who recite the 
Book of Psalms."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 344

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Wail:
Hadith: Abu Musa said to `Abdullah bin Mas`ud, "If one does not find water (for ablution) can he give up the 
prayer?" `Abdullah replied, "If you give the permission to perform Tayammum they will perform 
Tayammum even if water was available if one of them found it cold." Abu Musa said, "What about 
the statement of `Ammar to `Umar?" `Abdullah replied, "`Umar was not satisfied by his statement."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 345

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Shaqiq bin Salama:
Hadith: I was with `Abdullah and Abu Musa; the latter asked the former, "O Abu `Abdur-Rahman! What is 
your opinion if somebody becomes Junub and no water is available?" `Abdullah replied, "Do not pray 
till water is found." Abu Musa said, "What do you say about the statement of `Ammar (who was 
ordered by the Prophet (ﷺ) to perform Tayammum). The Prophet (ﷺ) said to him: "Perform Tayammum and 
that would be sufficient." `Abdullah replied, "Don't you see that `Umar was not satisfied by `Ammar's 
statement?" Abu- Musa said, "All right, leave `Ammar's statement, but what will you say about this 
verse (of Tayammum)?" `Abdullah kept quiet and then said, "If we allowed it, then they would 
probably perform Tayammum even if water was available, if one of them found it (water) cold." The 
narrator added, "I said to Shaqiq, "Then did `Abdullah dislike to perform Tayammum because of 
this?" He replied, "Yes."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 346

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-A`mash:
Hadith: Shaqiq said, "While I was sitting with `Abdullah and Abu Musa Al-Ash`ari, the latter asked the 
former, 'If a person becomes Junub and does not find water for one month, can he perform 
Tayammum and offer his prayer?' (He applied in the negative). Abu Musa said, 'What do you say 
about this verse from Sura "Al-Ma'ida": When you do not find water then perform Tayammum with 
clean earth? `Abdullah replied, 'If we allowed it then they would probably perform Tayammum with 
clean earth even if water were available but cold.' I said to Shaqiq, 'You then disliked to perform 
Tayammum because of this?' Shaqiq said, 'Yes.' (Shaqiq added), "Abu Musa said, 'Haven't you heard 
the statement of `Ammar to `Umar? He said: I was sent out by Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) for some job and I 
became Junub and could not find water so I rolled myself over the dust (clean earth) like an animal 
does, and when I told the Prophet (ﷺ) of that he said, 'Like this would have been sufficient.' The Prophet (ﷺ) 
(saying so) lightly stroked the earth with his hand once and blew it off, then passed his (left) hand over 
the back of his right hand or his (right) hand over the back of his left hand and then passed them over 
his face.' So `Abdullah said to Abu- Musa, 'Don't you know that `Umar was not satisfied with 
`Ammar's statement?' " 
Narrated Shaqiq: While I was with `Abdullah and Abu Musa, the latter said to the former, "Haven't 
you heard the statement of `Ammar to `Umar? He said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) sent you and me out and I 
became Junub and rolled myself in the dust (clean earth) (for Tayammum). When we came to Allah's 
Apostle I told him about it and he said, 'This would have been sufficient,' passing his hands over his 
face and the backs of his hands once only.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 347

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Imran bin Husain Al-Khuza`i:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saw a person sitting aloof and not praying with the people. He asked him, "O so and 
so! What prevented you from offering the prayer with the people?" He replied, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I 
am Junub and there is no water." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Perform Tayammum with clean earth and that 
will be sufficient for you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 348

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Dhar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "While I was at Mecca the roof of my house was opened and Gabriel descended, 
opened my chest, and washed it with Zamzam water. Then he brought a golden tray full of wisdom 
and faith and having poured its contents into my chest, he closed it. Then he took my hand and 
ascended with me to the nearest heaven, when I reached the nearest heaven, Gabriel said to the 
gatekeeper of the heaven, 'Open (the gate).' The gatekeeper asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel answered: 
'Gabriel.' He asked, 'Is there anyone with you?' Gabriel replied, 'Yes, Muhammad I is with me.' He 
asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel said, 'Yes.' So the gate was opened and we went over the nearest 
heaven and there we saw a man sitting with some people on his right and some on his left. When he 
looked towards his right, he laughed and when he looked toward his left he wept. Then he said, 
'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious son.' I asked Gabriel, 'Who is he?' He replied, 'He is Adam and 
the people on his right and left are the souls of his offspring. Those on his right are the people of 
Paradise and those on his left are the people of Hell and when he looks towards his right he laughs and 
when he looks towards his left he weeps.' 
Then he ascended with me till he reached the second heaven and he (Gabriel) said to its gatekeeper, 
'Open (the gate).' The gatekeeper said to him the same as the gatekeeper of the first heaven had said 
and he opened the gate. Anas said: "Abu Dhar added that the Prophet (ﷺ) met Adam, Idris, Moses, Jesus 
and Abraham, he (Abu Dhar) did not mention on which heaven they were but he mentioned that he 
(the Prophet (ﷺ) ) met Adam on the nearest heaven and Abraham on the sixth heaven. Anas said, "When 
Gabriel along with the Prophet (ﷺ) passed by Idris, the latter said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious 
brother.' The Prophet (ﷺ) asked, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is Idris." The Prophet (ﷺ) added, "I passed 
by Moses and he said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious brother.' I asked Gabriel, 'Who is he?' 
Gabriel replied, 'He is Moses.' Then I passed by Jesus and he said, 'Welcome! O pious brother and 
pious Prophet.' I asked, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is Jesus. 
Then I passed by Abraham and he said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious son.' I asked Gabriel, 
'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is Abraham. The Prophet (ﷺ) added, 'Then Gabriel ascended with me to a 
place where I heard the creaking of the pens." Ibn Hazm and Anas bin Malik said: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 
"Then Allah enjoined fifty prayers on my followers when I returned with this order of Allah, I passed 
by Moses who asked me, 'What has Allah enjoined on your followers?' I replied, 'He has enjoined 
fifty prayers on them.' Moses said, 'Go back to your Lord (and appeal for reduction) for your followers 
will not be able to bear it.' (So I went back to Allah and requested for reduction) and He reduced it to 
half. When I passed by Moses again and informed him about it, he said, 'Go back to your Lord as your 
followers will not be able to bear it.' So I returned to Allah and requested for further reduction and 
half of it was reduced. I again passed by Moses and he said to me: 'Return to your Lord, for your 
followers will not be able to bear it. So I returned to Allah and He said, 'These are five prayers and 
they are all (equal to) fifty (in reward) for My Word does not change.' I returned to Moses and he told 
me to go back once again. I replied, 'Now I feel shy of asking my Lord again.' Then Gabriel took me 
till we '' reached Sidrat-il-Muntaha (Lote tree of; the utmost boundary) which was shrouded in colors, 
indescribable. Then I was admitted into Paradise where I found small (tents or) walls (made) of pearls 
and its earth was of musk."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 349

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: the mother of believers: Allah enjoined the prayer when He enjoined it, it was two rak`at only (in 
every prayer) both when in residence or on journey. Then the prayers offered on journey remained the 
same, but (the rak`at of) the prayers for non-travelers were increased.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 350

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um `Atiya:
Hadith: We were ordered to bring out our menstruating women and veiled women in the religious gatherings 
and invocation of Muslims on the two `Id festivals. These menstruating women were to keep away 
from their Musalla. A woman asked, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ' What about one who does not have a veil?" 
He said, "Let her share the veil of her companion."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 351

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir:
Hadith: Once Jabir prayed with his Izar tied to his back while his clothes were Lying beside him on a wooden 
peg. Somebody asked him, "Do you offer your prayer in a single Izar?" He replied, "I did so to show it 
to a fool like you. Had anyone of us two garments in the lifetime of the Prophet?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 352

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin Al Munkadir:
Hadith: I saw Jabir bin `Abdullah praying in a single garment and he said that he had seen the Prophet (ﷺ) praying 
in a single garment.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 353

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Umar bin Abi Salama:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed in one garment and crossed its ends.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 354

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Umar bin Abi Salama:
Hadith: I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) offering prayers in a single garment in the house of Um-Salama and he had crossed 
its ends around his shoulders.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 355

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Umar bin Abi Salama:
Hadith: In the house of Um-Salama I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) offering prayers, wrapped in a single garment 
around his body with its ends crossed round his shoulders.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 356

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Murra:
Hadith: (the freed slave of Um Hani) Um Hani, the daughter of Abi Talib said, "I went to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) in 
the year of the conquest of Mecca and found him taking a bath and his daughter Fatima was screening 
him. I greeted him. He asked, 'Who is she?' I replied, 'I am Um Hani bint Abi Talib.' He said, 
'Welcome! O Um Hani.' When he finished his bath he stood up and prayed eight rak`at while wearing 
a single garment wrapped round his body and when he finished I said, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ! My brother 
has told me that he will kill a person whom I gave shelter and that person is so and so the son of 
Hubaira.' The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'We shelter the person whom you have sheltered.' " Um Hani added, "And 
that was before noon (Duha).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 357

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: A person asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about the offering of the prayer in a single garment. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
replied, "Has every one of you got two garments?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 358

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "None of you should offer prayer in a single garment that does not cover the 
shoulders."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 359

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whoever prays in a single garment must cross its ends (over the shoulders).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 360

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sa`id bin Al-Harith:
Hadith: I asked Jabir bin `Abdullah about praying in a single garment. He said, "I traveled with the Prophet (ﷺ) 
during some of his journeys, and I came to him at night for some purpose and I found him praying. At 
that time, I was wearing a single garment with which I covered my shoulders and prayed by his side. 
When he finished the prayer, he asked, 'O Jabir! What has brought you here?' I told him what I 
wanted. When I finished, he asked, 'O Jabir! What is this garment which I have seen and with which 
you covered your shoulders?' I replied, 'It is a (tight) garment.' He said, 'If the garment is large 
enough, wrap it round the body (covering the shoulders) and if it is tight (too short) then use it as an 
Izar (tie it around your waist only.)' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 361

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl:
Hadith: The men used to pray with the Prophet (ﷺ) with their Izars tied around their necks as boys used to do; 
therefore the Prophet (ﷺ) told the women not to raise their heads till the men sat down straight (while 
praying).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 362

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mughira bin Shu`ba:
Hadith: Once I was traveling with the Prophet (ﷺ) and he said, "O Mughira! take this container of water." I took it 
and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went far away till he disappeared. He answered the call of nature and was wearing 
a Syrian cloak. He tried to take out his hands from its sleeve but it was very tight so he took out his 
hands from under it. I poured water and he performed ablution like that for prayers and passed his wet 
hands over his Khuff (socks made from thick fabric or leather) and then prayed .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 363

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: While Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was carrying stones (along) with the people of Mecca for (the building of) the 
Ka`ba wearing an Izar (waist-sheet cover), his uncle Al-`Abbas said to him, "O my nephew! (It would 
be better) if you take off your Izar and put it over your shoulders underneath the stones." So he took 
off his Izar and put it over his shoulders, but he fell unconscious and since then he had never been 
seen naked.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 364

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: A man stood up and asked the Prophet (ﷺ) about praying in a single garment. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Has 
every one of you two garments?" A man put a similar question to `Umar on which he replied, "When 
Allah makes you wealthier then you should clothe yourself properly during prayers. Otherwise one 
can pray with an Izar and a Rida' (a sheet covering the upper part of the body.) Izar and a shirt, Izar 
and a Qaba', trousers and a Rida, trousers and a shirt or trousers and a Qaba', Tubban and a Qaba' or 
Tubban and a shirt." (The narrator added, "I think that he also said a Tubban and a Rida. ")
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 365

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: A person asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), "What should a Muhrim wear?" He replied, "He should not wear 
shirts, trousers, a burnus (a hooded cloak), or clothes which are stained with saffron or Wars (a kind of 
perfume). Whoever does not find a sandal to wear can wear Khuffs (socks made from thick fabric or 
leather), but these should be cut short so as not to cover the ankles.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 366

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) forbade Ishtimal-As-Samma' (wrapping one's body with a garment so that one cannot 
raise its end or take one's hand out of it). He also forbade Al-Ihtiba' (sitting on buttocks with knees 
close to `Abdomen and feet apart with the hands circling the knees) while wrapping oneself with a 
single garment, without having a part of it over the private parts.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 367

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) forbade two kinds of sales i.e. Al-Limais and An-Nibadh (the former is a kind of sale in 
which the deal is completed if the buyer touches a thing, without seeing or checking it properly and 
the latter is a kind of a sale in which the deal is completed when the seller throws a thing towards the 
buyer giving him no opportunity to see, touch or check it) and (the Prophet (ﷺ) forbade) also Ishtimal-As- 
Samma' and Al-Ihtiba' in a single garment.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 368

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: On the Day of Nahr (10th of Dhul-Hijja, in the year prior to the last Hajj of the Prophet (ﷺ) when Abu 
Bakr was the leader of the pilgrims in that Hajj) Abu Bakr sent me along with other announcers to 
Mina to make a public announcement: "No pagan is allowed to perform Hajj after this year and no 
naked person is allowed to perform the Tawaf around the Ka`ba. Then Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) sent `Ali to 
read out the Surat Bara'a (at-Tauba) to the people; so he made the announcement along with us on the 
day of Nahr in Mina: "No pagan is allowed to perform Hajj after this year and no naked person is 
allowed to perform the Tawaf around the Ka`ba."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 369

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir:
Hadith: I went to Jabir bin `Abdullah and he was praying wrapped in a garment and his Rida was Lying beside 
him. When he finished the prayers, I said "O `Abdullah! You pray (in a single garment) while your 
Rida' is lying beside you." He replied, "Yes, I did it intentionally so that the ignorant ones like you 
might see me. I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) praying like this. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 370

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdul `Aziz:
Hadith: Anas said, 'When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) invaded Khaibar, we offered the Fajr prayer there (early in the 
morning) when it was still dark. The Prophet (ﷺ) rode and Abu Talha rode too and I was riding behind 
Abu Talha. The Prophet (ﷺ) passed through the lane of Khaibar quickly and my knee was touching the 
thigh of the Prophet (ﷺ) . He uncovered his thigh and I saw the whiteness of the thigh of the Prophet. 
When he entered the town, he said, 'Allahu Akbar! Khaibar is ruined. Whenever we approach near a 
(hostile) nation (to fight) then evil will be the morning of those who have been warned.' He repeated 
this thrice. The people came out for their jobs and some of them said, 'Muhammad (has come).' (Some 
of our companions added, "With his army.") We conquered Khaibar, took the captives, and the booty 
was collected. Dihya came and said, 'O Allah's Prophet! Give me a slave girl from the captives.' The 
Prophet said, 'Go and take any slave girl.' He took Safiya bint Huyai. A man came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and 
said, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)s! You gave Safiya bint Huyai to Dihya and she is the chief mistress of the 
tribes of Quraidha and An-Nadir and she befits none but you.' So the Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'Bring him along 
with her.' So Dihya came with her and when the Prophet (ﷺ) saw her, he said to Dihya, 'Take any slave 
girl other than her from the captives.' Anas added: The Prophet (ﷺ) then manumitted her and married her." 
Thabit asked Anas, "O Abu Hamza! What did the Prophet (ﷺ) pay her (as Mahr)?" He said, "Her self was 
her Mahr for he manumitted her and then married her." Anas added, "While on the way, Um Sulaim 
dressed her for marriage (ceremony) and at night she sent her as a bride to the Prophet (ﷺ) . So the 
Prophet was a bridegroom and he said, 'Whoever has anything (food) should bring it.' He spread out a 
leather sheet (for the food) and some brought dates and others cooking butter. (I think he (Anas) 
mentioned As-Sawaq). So they prepared a dish of Hais (a kind of meal). And that was Walima (the 
marriage banquet) of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 371

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to offer the Fajr prayer and some believing women covered with their veiling 
sheets used to attend the Fajr prayer with him and then they would return to their homes unrecognized 
.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 372

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: the Prophet (ﷺ) prayed in a Khamisa (a square garment) having marks. During the prayer, he looked at its 
marks. So when he finished the prayer he said, "Take this Khamisa of mine to Abu Jahm and get me 
his Inbijaniya (a woolen garment without marks) as it (the Khamisa) has diverted my attention from 
the prayer."
Narrated `Aisha:

The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'I was looking at its (Khamisa's) marks during the prayers and I was afraid that it 
may put me in trial (by taking away my attention).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 373

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: `Aisha had a Qiram (a thin marked woolen curtain) with which she had screened one side of her home. 
The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Take away this Qiram of yours, as its pictures are still displayed in front of me 
during my prayer (i.e. they divert my attention from the prayer).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 374

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Uqba bin 'Amir:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) was given a silken Farruj [??] as a present. He wore it while praying. When he had 
finished his prayer, he took it off violently as if with a strong aversion to it and said, "It is not the 
dress of Allah-fearing pious people."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 375

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
Hadith: I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) in a red leather tent and I saw Bilal taking the remaining water with which the 
Prophet had performed ablution. I saw the people taking the utilized water impatiently and whoever 
got some of it rubbed it on his body and those who could not get any took the moisture from the 
others' hands. Then I saw Bilal carrying a short spear (or stick) which he planted in the ground. The 
Prophet came out tucking up his red cloak, and led the people in prayer and offered two rak`at (facing 
the Ka`ba) taking a short spear (or stick) as a Sutra for his prayer. I saw the people and animals 
passing in front of him beyond the stick.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 376

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Hazim:
Hadith: Sahl bin Sa`d was asked about the (Prophet's) pulpit as to what thing it was made of? Sahl replied: 
"None remains alive amongst the people, who knows about it better than I. It was made of tamarisk 
(wood) of the forest. So and so, the slave of so and so prepared it for Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) . When it was 
constructed and place (in the Mosque), Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stood on it facing the Qibla and said 'Allahu 
Akbar', and the people stood behind him (and led the people in prayer). He recited and bowed and the 
people bowed behind him. Then he raised his head and stepped back, got down and prostrated on the 
ground and then he again ascended the pulpit, recited, bowed, raised his head and stepped back, got 
down and prostrate on the ground. So, this is what I know about the pulpit." 
Ahmad bin Hanbal said, "As the Prophet (ﷺ) was at a higher level than the people, there is no harm 
according to the above-mentioned Hadith if the Imam is at a higher level than his followers during the 
prayers."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 377

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) fell off a horse and his leg or shoulder got injured. He swore that he would not 
go to his wives for one month and he stayed in a Mashruba [??] (attic room) having stairs made of 
date palm trunks. So his companions came to visit him, and he led them in prayer sitting, whereas his 
companions were standing. When he finished the prayer, he said, "Imam is meant to be followed, so 
when he says 'Allahu Akbar,' say 'Allahu Akbar' and when he bows, bow and when he prostrates, 
prostrate and if he prays standing pray, standing. After the 29th day the Prophet (ﷺ) came down (from the 
attic room) and the people asked him, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! You swore that you will not go to your 
wives for one month." He said, "The month is 29 days."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 378

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrates `Abdullah bin Shaddad:
Hadith: Maimuna said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was praying while I was in my menses, sitting beside him and 
sometimes his clothes would touch me during his prostration." Maimuna added, "He prayed on a 
Khumra (a small mat sufficient just for the face and the hands while prostrating during prayers).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 379

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated 'Is-haq:
Hadith: Anas bin Malik said, "My grandmother Mulaika invited Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) for a meal which she herself 
had prepared. He ate from it and said, 'Get up! I will lead you in the prayer.' " Anas added, "I took my 
Hasir, washed it with water as it had become dark because of long use and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stood on it. 
The orphan (Damira or Ruh) and I aligned behind him and the old lady (Mulaika) stood behind us. 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) led us in the prayer and offered two rak`at and then left."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 380

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to pray on Khumra.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 381

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Salama:
Hadith: `Aisha the wife of the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I used to sleep in front o Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and my legs were 
opposite his Qibla and in prostration he pushed my legs and I withdrew then and when he stood, I 
stretched them.' `Aisha added, "In those days the houses were without lights."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 382

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah Apostle prayed while I was lying like a dead body on his family bed between him and his Qibla.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 383

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Urwa:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed while `Aisha was lying between him and his Qibla on the bed on which they used 
to sleep.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 384

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: We used to pray with the Prophet (ﷺ) and some of us used to place the ends of their clothes at the place of 
prostration because of scorching heat.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 385

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Maslama:
Hadith: Sa`id bin Yazid Al-Azdi: I asked Anas bin Malik whether the Prophet (ﷺ) had ever, prayed with his shoes 
on. He replied "Yes."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 386

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibrahim:
Hadith: Hammam bin Al-Harith said, "I saw Jarir bin `Abdullah urinating. Then he performed ablution and 
passed his (wet) hands over his Khuffs (socks made from thick fabric or leather), stood up and prayed. 
He was asked about it. He replied that he had seen the Prophet (ﷺ) doing the same." They approved of this 
narration as Jarir was one of those who embraced Islam very late.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 387

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
Hadith: 

     I helped the Prophet (ﷺ) in performing ablution and he passed his wet 
     hands over his Khuffs and prayed.

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 388

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Hudhaifa that he saw a person bowing and prostrating imperfectly. When he finished his Salat, Hudhaifa told him that he had not offered Salat. The subnarrator added, "I think that Hudhaifa also said:
Hadith: Were you to die you would die on a "Sunna" (legal way) other than that of Muhammad (ﷺ)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 389

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik:
Hadith: 

     Ibn Buhaina, "When the Prophet (ﷺ) prayed, he used to separate his arms 
     from his body so widely that the whiteness of his armpits was 
     visible."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 390

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whoever prays like us and faces our Qibla and eats our slaughtered animals is a 
Muslim and is under Allah's and His Apostle's protection. So do not betray Allah by betraying those 
who are in His protection."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 391

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "I have been ordered to fight the people till they say: 'None has the right to be 
worshipped but Allah.' And if they say so, pray like our prayers, face our Qibla and slaughter as we 
slaughter, then their blood and property will be sacred to us and we will not interfere with them except 
legally and their reckoning will be with Allah."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 392

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari:
Hadith: Narrated Maimun bin Siyah that he asked Anas bin 
Malik, "O Abu Hamza! What makes the life and property of a person sacred?" He replied, "Whoever 
says, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah', faces our Qibla during the prayers, prays like us 
and eats our slaughtered animal, then he is a Muslim, and has got the same rights and obligations as 
other Muslims have."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 393

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr bin Dinar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "While defecating, neither face nor turn your back to the Qibla but face either east 
or west." Abu Aiyub added. "When we arrived in Sham we came across some lavatories facing the 
Qibla; therefore we turned ourselves while using them and asked for Allah's forgiveness."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 394

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mujahid:
Hadith: I asked Ibn `Umar, "Can a person who has performed the Tawaf around the Ka`ba for `Umra but has 
not performed the (Sa`i) Tawaf of Safa and Marwa, have a sexual relation with his wife?" Ibn `Umar 
replied "When the Prophet (ﷺ) reached Mecca he performed the Tawaf around the Ka`ba 
(circumambulated it seven times) and offered a two-rak`at prayer (at the place) behind the station (of 
Abraham) and then performed the Tawaf (Sa`i) of Safa and Marwa, and verily in Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) you 
have a good example." Then we put the same question to Jabir bin `Abdullah and he too replied, "He 
should not go near his wife (for sexual relation) till he has finished the Tawaf of Safa and Marwa."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 395, 396

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Someone came to Ibn `Umar and said, "Here is Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) entering the Ka`ba." Ibn `Umar said, 
"I went there but the Prophet (ﷺ) had come out of the Ka`ba and I found Bilal standing between its two 
doors. I asked Bilal, 'Did the Prophet (ﷺ) pray in the Ka`ba?' Bilal replied, 'Yes, he prayed two rak`at 
between the two pillars which are to your left on entering the Ka`ba. Then Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came out 
and offered a two-rak`at prayer facing the Ka`ba.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 397

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Bara' bin `Azib:
Hadith: When the Prophet (ﷺ) entered the Ka`ba, he invoked Allah in each and every side of it and did not pray 
till he came out of it, and offered a two-rak`at prayer facing the Ka`ba and said, "This is the Qibla."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 398

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) prayed facing Baitul-Maqdis for sixteen or seventeen months but he loved to face the 
Ka`ba (at Mecca) so Allah revealed: "Verily, We have seen the turning of your face to the heaven!" 
(2:144) So the Prophet (ﷺ) faced the Ka`ba and the fools amongst the people namely "the Jews" said, 
"What has turned them from their Qibla (Baitul-Maqdis) which they formerly observed"" (Allah 
revealed): "Say: 'To Allah belongs the East and the West. He guides whom he will to a straight path'." 
(2:142) A man prayed with the Prophet (facing the Ka`ba) and went out. He saw some of the Ansar 
praying the `Asr prayer with their faces towards Baitul-Maqdis, he said, "I bear witness that I prayed 
with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) facing the Ka`ba." So all the people turned their faces towards the Ka`ba.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 399

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to pray (optional, non-obligatory prayer) while riding on his mount (Rahila) 
wherever it turned, and whenever he wanted to pray the compulsory prayer he dismounted and prayed 
facing the Qibla.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 400

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Umar (bin Al-Khattab):
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed (and the sub-narrator Ibrahim said, "I do not know whether he prayed more or less 
than usual"), and when he had finished the prayers he was asked, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Has there been 
any change in the prayers?" He said, "What is it?' The people said, "You have prayed so much and so 
much." So the Prophet (ﷺ) bent his legs, faced the Qibla and performed two prostration's (of Sahu) and 
finished his prayers with Taslim (by turning his face to right and left saying: 'As-Salamu `Alaikum- 
Warahmat-ullah'). When he turned his face to us he said, "If there had been anything changed in the 
prayer, surely I would have informed you but I am a human being like you and liable to forget like 
you. So if I forget remind me and if anyone of you is doubtful about his prayer, he should follow what 
he thinks to be correct and complete his prayer accordingly and finish it and do two prostrations (of 
Sahu).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 401

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: My Lord agreed with me in three things: 
-1. I said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), I wish we took the station of Abraham as our praying place (for some of 
our prayers). So came the Divine Inspiration: And take you (people) the station of Abraham as a place 
of prayer (for some of your prayers e.g. two rak`at of Tawaf of Ka`ba)". (2.125) 
-2. And as regards the (verse of) the veiling of the women, I said, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I wish you 
ordered your wives to cover themselves from the men because good and bad ones talk to them.' So the 
verse of the veiling of the women was revealed. 
-3. Once the wives of the Prophet (ﷺ) made a united front against the Prophet (ﷺ) and I said to them, 'It may 
be if he (the Prophet) divorced you, (all) that his Lord (Allah) will give him instead of you wives 
better than you.' So this verse (the same as I had said) was revealed." (66.5).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 402

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: as above (395).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 402b

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: While the people were offering the Fajr prayer at Quba' (near Medina), someone came to them and 
said: "It has been revealed to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) tonight, and he has been ordered to pray facing the 
Ka`ba." So turn your faces to the Ka`ba. Those people were facing Sham (Jerusalem) so they turned 
their faces towards Ka`ba (at Mecca).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 403

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: "Once the Prophet (ﷺ) offered five rak`at in Zuhr prayer. He was asked, "Is there an increase in the 
prayer?" The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "And what is it?" They said, "You have prayed five rak`at.' So he bent his 
legs and performed two prostrations (of Sahu).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 404

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) saw some sputum in the direction of the Qibla (on the wall of the mosque) and he 
disliked that and the sign of disgust was apparent from his face. So he got up and scraped it off with 
his hand and said, "Whenever anyone of you stands for the prayer, he is speaking in private to his 
Lord or his Lord is between him and his Qibla. So, none of you should spit in the direction of the 
Qibla but one can spit to the left or under his foot." The Prophet (ﷺ) then took the corner of his sheet and 
spat in it and folded it and said, "Or you can do this. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 405

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saw sputum on the wall of the mosque in the direction of the Qibla and scraped it off. 
He faced the people and said, "Whenever any one of you is praying, he should not spit in front of him 
because in the prayer Allah is in front of him."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 406

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira and Abu Sa`id:
Hadith: (the mother of faithful believers) Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saw some nasal secretions, expectoration or sputum 
on the wall of the mosque in the direction of the Qibla and scraped it off.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 407

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira and Abu Sa`id:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saw some expectoration on the wall of the mosque; he took gravel and scraped it off 
and said, "If anyone of you wanted to spit he should neither spit in front of him nor on his right but he 
could spit either on his left or under his left foot."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 408, 409

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saw some expectoration on the wall of the mosque; he took gravel and scraped it off 
and said, "If anyone of you wanted to spit, he should neither spit in front of him nor on his right but 
could spit either on his left or under his left foot."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 410, 411

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "None of you should spit in front or on his right but he could spit either on his left 
or under his foot."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 412

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "A faithful believer while in prayer is speaking in private to his Lord, so he should 
neither spit in front of him nor to his right side but he could spit either on his left or under his foot."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 413

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) saw sputum on (the wall of) the mosque in the direction of the Qibla and scraped it off 
with gravel. Then he forbade Spitting in front or on the right, but allowed it on one's left or under 
one's left foot.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 414

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Spitting in the mosque is a sin and its expiation is to bury it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 415

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Prophet said, "If anyone of you stands for prayer, he should not spit in front of him because in prayer 
he is speaking in private to Allah and he should not spit on his right as there is an angel, but he can 
spit either on his left or under his left foot and bury it (i.e. expectoration).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 416

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) saw expectoration (on the wall of the mosque) in the direction of the Qibla and scraped it 
off with his hand. It seemed that he disliked it and the sign of disgust was apparent from his face. He 
said, "If anyone of you stands for the prayer, he is speaking in private to his Lord, (or) his Lord is 
between him and his Qibla, therefore he should not spit towards his Qibla, but he could spit either on 
his left or under his foot." Then he took the corner of his sheet and spat in it, folded it and said, "Or do 
this."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 417

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Do you consider or see that my face is towards the Qibla? By Allah, neither 
your submissiveness nor your bowing is hidden from me, surely I see you from my back."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 418

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) led us in a prayer and then got up on the pulpit and said, "In your prayer and bowing, I 
certainly see you from my back as I see you (while looking at you.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 419

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ordered for a horse race; the trained horses were to run from a place called Al-Hafya' 
to Thaniyat Al-Wada` and the horses which were not trained were to run from Al-Thaniya to the 
Masjid (mosque of) Bani Zuraiq. The sub narrator added: Ibn `Umar was one of those who took part 
in the race.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 420

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Some goods came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) from Bahrain. The Prophet (ﷺ) ordered the people to spread them in 
the mosque --it was the biggest amount of goods Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) had ever received. He left for prayer 
and did not even look at it. After finishing the prayer, he sat by those goods and gave from those to 
everybody he saw. Al-`Abbas came to him and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! give me (something) too, 
because I gave ransom for myself and `Aqil". Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) told him to take. So he stuffed his 
garment with it and tried to carry it away but he failed to do so. He said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Order 
someone to help me in lifting it." The Prophet (ﷺ) refused. He then said to the Prophet: Will you please 
help me to lift it?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) refused. Then Al-`Abbas threw some of it and tried to lift it (but 
failed). He again said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) Order someone to help me to lift it." He refused. Al-`Abbas 
then said to the Prophet: "Will you please help me to lift it?" He again refused. Then Al-`Abbas threw 
some of it, and lifted it on his shoulders and went away. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) kept on watching him till he 
disappeared from his sight and was astonished at his greediness. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) did not get up till the 
last coin was distributed.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 421

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl bin Sa`d:
Hadith: I found the Prophet (ﷺ) in the mosque along with some people. He said to me, "Did Abu Talha send you?" 
I said, "Yes". He said, "For a meal?" I said, "Yes." Then he said to his companions, "Get up." They set 
out and I was ahead of them.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 422

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Itban bin Malik:
Hadith: A man said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! If a man finds another man with his wife, (committing adultery) 
should the husband kill him?" Later on I saw them (the man and his wife) doing Li`an in the mosque 
(taking oaths, one accusing, and the other denying adultery).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 423

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Itban bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) came to my house and said, "Where do you like me to pray?" I pointed to a place. The 
Prophet then said, "Allahu Akbar", and we aligned behind him and he offered a two-rak`at prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 424

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: who was one of the companions of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and one of the Ansar's who took part in the battle 
of Badr: I came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I have weak eyesight and I lead my 
people in prayers. When it rains the water flows in the valley between me and my people so I cannot 
go to their mosque to lead them in prayer. O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I wish you would come to my house and 
pray in it so that I could take that place as a Musalla. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said. "Allah willing, I will do 
so." Next day after the sun rose high, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and Abu Bakr came and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) asked 
for permission to enter. I gave him permission and he did not sit on entering the house but said to me, 
"Where do you like me to pray?" I pointed to a place in my house. So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stood there and 
said, 'Allahu Akbar', and we all got up and aligned behind him and offered a two-rak`at prayer and 
ended it with Taslim. We requested him to stay for a meal called "Khazira" which we had prepared for 
him. Many members of our family gathered in the house and one of them said, "Where is Malik bin 
Al-Dukhaishin or Ibn Al-Dukhshun?" One of them replied, "He is a hypocrite and does not love Allah 
and His Apostle." Hearing that, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Do not say so. Haven't you seen that he said, 
'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah' for Allah's sake only?" He said, "Allah and His 
Apostle know better. We have seen him helping and advising hypocrites." 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Allah has forbidden the (Hell) fire for those who say, 'None has the right to be 
worshipped but Allah' for Allah's sake only."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 425

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to start every thing from the right (for good things) whenever it was possible in all 
his affairs; for example: in washing, combing or wearing shoes.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 426

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Um Habiba and Um Salama mentioned about a church they had seen in Ethiopia in which there were 
pictures. They told the Prophet (ﷺ) about it, on which he said, "If any religious man dies amongst those 
people they would build a place of worship at his grave and make these pictures in it. They will be the 
worst creature in the sight of Allah on the Day of Resurrection."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 427

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Al-Taiyah [??]:
Hadith: When the Prophet (ﷺ) arrived Medina he dismounted at `Awali-i-Medina amongst a tribe called Banu 
`Amr bin `Auf. He stayed there For fourteen nights. Then he sent for Bani An-Najjar and they came 
armed with their swords. As if I am looking (just now) as the Prophet (ﷺ) was sitting over his Rahila 
(Mount) with Abu Bakr riding behind him and all Banu An-Najjar around him till he dismounted at 
the courtyard of Abu Aiyub's house. The Prophet (ﷺ) loved to pray wherever the time for the prayer was 
due even at sheep-folds. Later on he ordered that a mosque should be built and sent for some people of 
Banu-An-Najjar and said, "O Banu An-Najjar! Suggest to me the price of this (walled) piece of land 
of yours." They replied, "No! By Allah! We do not demand its price except from Allah." Anas added: 
There were graves of pagans in it and some of it was unleveled and there were some date-palm trees 
in it. The Prophet (ﷺ) ordered that the graves of the pagans be dug out and the unleveled land be level led 
and the date-palm trees be cut down . (So all that was done). They aligned these cut date-palm trees 
towards the Qibla of the mosque (as a wall) and they also built two stone side-walls (of the mosque). 
His companions brought the stones while reciting some poetic verses. The Prophet (ﷺ) was with them and 
he kept on saying, "There is no goodness except that of the Hereafter, O Allah! So please forgive the 
Ansars and the emigrants. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 428

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: Anas said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed in the sheep fold." Later on I heard him saying, "He prayed in the 
sheep folds before the construction of the, mosque."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 429

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Abbas:
Hadith: "I saw Ibn `Umar praying while taking his camel as a Sutra in front of him and he said, "I saw the 
Prophet doing the same."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 430

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: The sun eclipsed and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) offered the eclipse prayer and said, "I have been shown the 
Hellfire (now) and I never saw a worse and horrible sight than the sight I have seen today."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 431

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) had said, "Offer some of your prayers (Nawafil) at home, and do not take your houses as 
graves."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 432

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Do not enter (the places) of these people where Allah's punishment had fallen 
unless you do so weeping. If you do not weep, do not enter (the places of these people) because 
Allah's curse and punishment which fell upon them may fall upon you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 433

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha and `Abdullah bin `Abbas:
Hadith: Um Salama told Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about a church which she had seen in Ethiopia and which was called 
Mariya. She told him about the pictures which she had seen in it. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If any 
righteous pious man dies amongst them, they would build a place of worship at his grave and make 
these pictures in it; they are the worst creatures in the sight of Allah."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 434

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: When the last moment of the life of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came he started putting his 'Khamisa' on his face 
and when he felt hot and short of breath he took it off his face and said, "May Allah curse the Jews 
and Christians for they built the places of worship at the graves of their Prophets." The Prophet (ﷺ) was 
warning (Muslims) of what those had done.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 435, 436

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "May Allah's curse be on the Jews for they built the places of worship at the 
graves of their Prophets."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 437

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "I have been given five things which were not given to any amongst the Prophets 
before me. These are: 
-1. Allah made me victorious by awe (by His frightening my enemies) for a distance of one month's 
journey. 
-2. The earth has been made for me (and for my followers) a place for praying and a thing to perform 
Tayammum. Therefore my followers can pray wherever the time of a prayer is due. 
-3. The booty has been made Halal (lawful) for me (and was not made so for anyone else). 
-4. Every Prophet used to be sent to his nation exclusively but I have been sent to all mankind. 
-5. I have been given the right of intercession (on the Day of Resurrection.)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 438

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: There was a black slave girl belonging to an 'Arab tribe and they manumitted her but she remained 
with them. The slave girl said, "Once one of their girls (of that tribe) came out wearing a red leather 
scarf decorated with precious stones. It fell from her or she placed it somewhere. A kite passed by that 
place, saw it Lying there and mistaking it for a piece of meat, flew away with it. Those people 
searched for it but they did not find it. So they accused me of stealing it and started searching me and 
even searched my private parts." The slave girl further said, "By Allah! while I was standing (in that 
state) with those people, the same kite passed by them and dropped the red scarf and it fell amongst 
them. I told them, 'This is what you accused me of and I was innocent and now this is it.' " `Aisha 
added: That slave girl came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and embraced Islam. She had a tent or a small room 
with a low roof in the mosque. Whenever she called on me, she had a talk with me and whenever she 
sat with me, she would recite the following: "The day of the scarf (band) was one of the wonders of 
our Lord, verily He rescued me from the disbelievers' town. `Aisha added: "Once I asked her, 'What is 
the matter with you? Whenever you sit with me, you always recite these poetic verses.' On that she 
told me the whole story. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 439

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl bin Sa`d:
Hadith: `Abdullah bin `Umar said: I used to sleep in the mosque of the Prophet (ﷺ) while I was young and 
unmarried.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 440

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went to Fatima's house but did not find `Ali there. So he asked, "Where is your 
cousin?" She replied, "There was something between us and he got angry with me and went out. He 
did not sleep (midday nap) in the house." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) asked a person to look for him. That person 
came and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! He (Ali) is sleeping in the mosque." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went there 
and `Ali was lying. His upper body cover had fallen down to one side of his body and he was covered 
with dust. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) started cleaning the dust from him saying: "Get up! O Aba Turab. Get up! 
O Aba Turab (literally means: O father of dust).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 441

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: I saw seventy of As-Suffa men and none of them had a Rida' (a garment covering the upper part of the 
body). They had either Izars (only) or sheets which they tied round their necks. Some of these sheets 
reached the middle of their legs and some reached their heels and they used to gather them with their 
hands lest their private parts should become naked.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 442

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Qatada Al-Aslami:
Hadith: I went to the Prophet (ﷺ) in the mosque (the sub-narrator Mas`ar thought that Jabir had said, "In the 
forenoon.") He ordered me to pray two rak`at. He owed me some money and he repaid it to me and 
gave more than what was due to me.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 443

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If anyone of you enters a mosque, he should pray two rak`at before sitting."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 444

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "The angels keep on asking Allah's forgiveness for anyone of you, as long as he 
is at his Musalla (praying place) and he does not pass wind (Hadath). They say, 'O Allah! Forgive 
him, O Allah! be Merciful to him."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 445

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ikrima:
Hadith: In the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) the mosque was built of adobes, its roof of the leaves of date-palms 
and its pillars of the stems of date-palms. Abu Bakr did not alter it. `Umar expanded it on the same 
pattern as it was in the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) by using adobes, leaves of date-palms and changing 
the pillars into wooden ones. `Uthman changed it by expanding it to a great extent and built its walls 
with engraved stones and lime and made its pillars of engraved stones and its roof of teak wood.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 446

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl:
Hadith: Ibn `Abbas said to me and to his son `Ali, "Go to Abu Sa`id and listen to what he narrates." So we 
went and found him in a garden looking after it. He picked up his Rida', wore it and sat down and 
started narrating till the topic of the construction of the mosque reached. He said, "We were carrying 
one adobe at a time while `Ammar was carrying two. The Prophet (ﷺ) saw him and started removing the 
dust from his body and said, "May Allah be Merciful to `Ammar. He will be inviting them (i.e. his 
murderers, the rebellious group) to Paradise and they will invite him to Hell-fire." `Ammar said, "I 
seek refuge with Allah from affliction."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 447

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) sent someone to a woman telling her to "Order her slave, carpenter, to prepare a 
wooden pulpit for him to sit on."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 448

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated 'Ubaidullah Al-Khaulani:
Hadith: A woman said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Shall I get something constructed for you to sit on as I have a 
slave who is a carpenter?" He replied, "Yes, if you like." So she had that pulpit constructed.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 449

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr:
Hadith: I heard `Uthman bin `Affan saying, when people argued too much about his intention to reconstruct 
the mosque of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), "You have talked too much. I heard the Prophet (ﷺ) saying, 'Whoever built 
a mosque, (Bukair thought that `Asim, another sub-narrator, added, "Intending Allah's Pleasure"), 
Allah would build for him a similar place in Paradise.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 450

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Burda bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: I heard Jabir bin `Abdullah saying, "A man passed through the mosque carrying arrows. Allah's 
Apostle said to him, 'Hold them by their heads.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 451

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hassan bin Thabit Al-Ansari:
Hadith: (on the authority of his father) The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever passes through our mosques or markets 
with arrows should hold them by their heads lest he should injure a Muslim."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 452

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: I asked Abu Huraira "By Allah! Tell me the truth whether you heard the Prophet (ﷺ) saying, 'O Hassan! 
Reply on behalf of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). O Allah! Help him with the Holy Spirit." Abu Huraira said, "Yes . 
"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 453

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Once I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) at the door of my house while some Ethiopians were playing in the 
mosque (displaying their skill with spears). Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was screening me with his Rida' so as to 
enable me to see their display. (`Urwa said that `Aisha said, "I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) and the Ethiopians 
were playing with their spears.")
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 454, 455

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ka`b:
Hadith: Barirah came to seek my help regarding her manumission (freedom). I told herself you like I would pay your price 
to your masters but your Wala' (allegiance) would be for me." Her masters said, "If you like, you can 
pay what remains (of the price of her manumission), (Sufyan the sub-narrator once said), or if you like 
you can manumit her, but her (inheritance) Al-Wala would be for us. "When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came, I 
spoke to him about it. He said, "Buy her and manumit her. No doubt Al-Wala' is for the manumitted." 
Then Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stood on the pulpit (or Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ascended the pulpit as Sufyan once said), 
and said, "What about some people who impose conditions which are not present in Allah's Book 
(Laws)? Whoever imposes conditions which are not in Allah's Book (Laws), his conditions will be 
invalid even if he imposed them a hundred times."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 456

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: In the mosque l asked Ibn Abi Hadrad to pay the debts which he owed to me and our voices grew 
louder. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) heard that while he was in his house. So he came to us raising the curtain of 
his room and said, "O Ka`b!" I replied, "Labaik, O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)!" He said, "O Ka`b! reduce your 
debt to one half," gesturing with his hand. I said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I have done so." Then Allah's 
Apostle said (to Ibn Abi Hadrad), "Get up and pay the debt to him."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 457

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: A black man or a black woman used to sweep the mosque and he or she died. The Prophet (ﷺ) asked 
about her (or him). He was told that she (or he) had died. He said, "Why did you not inform me? 
Show me his grave (or her grave)." So he went to her (his) grave and offered her (his) funeral prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 458

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Rafi:
Hadith: When the verses of Surat "Al-Baqara"' about the usury Riba were revealed, the Prophet (ﷺ) went to the 
mosque and recited them in front of the people and then banned the trade of alcohol.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 459

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     Abu Huraira said, "A man or a woman used to clean the mosque." (A 
     sub-narrator said, 'Most probably a woman..') Then he narrated the 
     Hadith of the Prophet

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 460

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     "The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Last night a big demon (afreet) from the Jinns 
     came to me and wanted to interrupt my prayers (or said something 
     similar) but Allah enabled me to overpower him. I wanted to fasten him
     to one of the pillars of the mosque so that all of you could See him 
     in the morning but I remembered the statement of my brother Solomon 
     (as stated in Quran): My Lord! Forgive me and bestow on me a kingdom 
     such as shall not belong to anybody after me (38.35)." The sub 
     narrator Rauh said, "He (the demon) was dismissed humiliated."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 461

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) sent some horsemen to Najd and they brought a man called Thumama bin Uthal from 
Bani Hanifa. They fastened him to one of the pillars of the mosque. The Prophet (ﷺ) came and ordered 
them to release him. He went to a (garden of) date-palms near the mosque, took a bath and entered 
the mosque again and said, "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is His 
Apostle" (i.e. he embraced Islam).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 462

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Salama:
Hadith: On the day of Al-Khandaq (battle of the Trench' the medial arm vein of Sa`d bin Mu`ad [??] was 
injured and the Prophet (ﷺ) pitched a tent in the mosque to look after him. There was another tent for 
Banu Ghaffar in the mosque and the blood started flowing from Sa`d's tent to the tent of Bani Ghaffar. 
They shouted, "O occupants of the tent! What is coming from you to us?" They found that Sa`d' 
wound was bleeding profusely and Sa`d died in his tent.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 463

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: I complained to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) that I was sick. He told me to perform the Tawaf behind the people 
while riding. So I did so and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was praying beside the Ka`ba and reciting the Sura 
starting with "Wat-tur wa kitabin mastur."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 464

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: Two of the companions of the Prophet (ﷺ) departed from him on a dark night and were led by two lights 
like lamps (going in front of them from Allah as a miracle) lighting the way in front of them, and 
when they parted, each of them was accompanied by one of these lights till he reached their 
(respective) houses.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 465

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) delivered a sermon and said, "Allah gave a choice to one of (His) slaves either to choose 
this world or what is with Him in the Hereafter. He chose the latter." Abu Bakr wept. I said to myself, 
"Why is this Sheikh weeping, if Allah gave choice to one (of His) slaves either to choose this world or 
what is with Him in the Here after and he chose the latter?" And that slave was Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
himself. Abu Bakr knew more than us. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "O Abu Bakr! Don't weep. The Prophet (ﷺ) 
added: Abu- Bakr has favored me much with his property and company. If I were to take a Khalil 
from mankind I would certainly have taken Abu Bakr but the Islamic brotherhood and friendship is 
sufficient. Close all the gates in the mosque except that of Abu Bakr.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 466

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) in his fatal illness came out with a piece of cloth tied round his head and sat on the 
pulpit. After thanking and praising Allah he said, "There is no one who had done more favor to me 
with life and property than Abu Bakr bin Abi Quhafa. If I were to take a Khalil, I would certainly have 
taken Abu- Bakr but the Islamic brotherhood is superior. Close all the small doors in this mosque 
except that of Abu Bakr."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 467

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Ibn `Umar said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) arrived at Mecca and sent for `Uthman bin Talha. He opened the gate of 
the Ka`ba and the Prophet, Bilal, Usama bin Zaid and `Uthman bin Talha entered the Ka`ba and then 
they closed its door (from inside). They stayed there for an hour, and then came out." Ibn `Umar 
added, "I quickly went to Bilal and asked him (whether the Prophet (ﷺ) had prayed). Bilal replied, 'He 
prayed in it.' I asked, 'Where?' He replied, 'Between the two pillars.' "Ibn `Umar added, "I forgot to 
ask how many rak`at he (the Prophet) had prayed in the Ka`ba."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 468

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) sent some horse men to Najd and they brought a man called Thumama bin Uthal from 
Bani Hanifa. They fastened him to one of the pillars of the mosque.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 469

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ka`b bin Malik:
Hadith: I was standing in the mosque and somebody threw a gravel at me. I looked and found that he was 
`Umar bin Al-Khattab. He said to me, "Fetch those two men to me." When I did, he said to them, 
"Who are you? (Or) where do you come from?" They replied, "We are from Ta'if." `Umar said, "Were 
you from this city (Medina) I would have punished you for raising your voices in the mosque of 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 470

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: During the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I asked Ibn Abi Hadrad in the mosque to pay the debts which he 
owed to me and our voices grew so loud that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) heard them while he was in his house. So 
he came to us after raising the curtain of his room. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "O Ka`b bin Malik!" I replied, 
"Labaik, O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)." He gestured with his hand to me to reduce the debt to one half. I said, "O 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) have done it." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said (to Ibn Hadrad), "Get up and pay it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 471

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: Ibn `Umar said, "While the Prophet (ﷺ) was on the pulpit, a man asked him how to offer the night prayers. 
He replied, 'Pray two rak`at at a time and then two and then two and so on, and if you are afraid of the 
dawn (the approach of the time of the Fajr prayer) pray one rak`a and that will be the witr for all the 
rak`at which you have offered." Ibn `Umar said, "The last rak`at of the night prayer should be odd, for 
the Prophet (ﷺ) ordered it to be so.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 472

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Waqid al-Laithi:
Hadith: A man came to the Prophet (ﷺ) while he was delivering the sermon and asked him how to offer the night 
prayers. The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, 'Pray two rak`at at a time and then two and then two and so on and if 
you are afraid of dawn (the approach of the time of the Fajr prayer) pray one rak`a and that will be the 
witr for all the rak`at which you have prayed." Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin `Abdullah bin `Umar: A man 
called the Prophet (ﷺ) while he was in the mosque.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 473

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abbad bin Tamim:
Hadith: While Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was sitting in the mosque (with some people) three men came, two of them 
came in front of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and the third one went away, and then one of them found a place in 
the circle and sat there while the second man sat behind the gathering, and the third one went away. 
When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) finished his preaching, he said, "Shall I tell you about these three persons? One 
of them betook himself to Allah and so Allah accepted him and accommodated him; the second felt 
shy before Allah so Allah did the same for him and sheltered him in His Mercy (and did not punish 
him), while the third turned his face from Allah, and went away, so Allah turned His face from him 
likewise.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 474

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: that his uncle said, "I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) lying flat (on his back) in the mosque with one leg on the 
other." Narrated Sa`id bin Al-Musaiyab that `Umar and `Uthman used to do the same.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 475

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: (the wife of the Prophet) I had seen my parents following Islam since I attained the age of puberty. 
Not a day passed but the Prophet (ﷺ) visited us, both in the mornings and evenings. My father Abu Bakr 
thought of building a mosque in the courtyard of his house and he did so. He used to pray and recite 
the Qur'an in it. The pagan women and their children used to stand by him and look at him with 
surprise. Abu Bakr was a Softhearted person and could not help weeping while reciting the Qur'an. 
The chiefs of the Quraish pagans became afraid of that (i.e. that their children and women might be 
affected by the recitation of Qur'an).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 476

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar or Ibn `Amr:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The prayer offered in congregation is twenty five times more superior (in reward) 
to the prayer offered alone in one's house or in a business center, because if one performs ablution and 
does it perfectly, and then proceeds to the mosque with the sole intention of praying, then for each 
step which he takes towards the mosque, Allah upgrades him a degree in reward and (forgives) 
crosses out one sin till he enters the mosque. When he enters the mosque he is considered in prayer as 
long as he is waiting for the prayer and the angels keep on asking for Allah's forgiveness for him and 
they keep on saying: 'O Allah! Be Merciful to him, O Allah! Forgive him, as long as he keeps on 
sitting at his praying place and does not pass wind. (See Hadith No. 620).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 477

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) clasped his hands, by interlacing his fingers.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 478, 479

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: That Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
said, "O `Abdullah bin `Amr! What will be your condition when you will be left with the sediments of 
(worst) people?" (They will be in conflict with each other).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 480

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrates Ibn Seereen:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "A faithful believer to a faithful believer is like the bricks of a wall, enforcing each 
other." While (saying that) the Prophet (ﷺ) clasped his hands, by interlacing his fingers.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 481

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Fudail bin Sulaiman:
Hadith: Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) led us in one of the two `Isha' prayers (Abu Huraira named that 
prayer but I forgot it)." Abu Huraira added, "He prayed two rak`at and then finished the prayer with 
Taslim. He stood up near a piece of wood Lying across the mosque and leaned on it in such a way as 
if he was angry. Then he put his right hand over the left and clasped his hands by interlacing his 
fingers and then put his J right cheek on the back of his left hand. The people who were in haste left 
the mosque through its gates. They wondered whether the prayer was reduced. And amongst them 
were Abu Bakr and `Umar but they hesitated to ask the Prophet. A long-handed man called Dhul- 
Yadain asked the Prophet, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Have you forgotten or has the prayer been reduced?' 
The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, 'I have neither forgotten nor has the prayer been reduced' The Prophet (ﷺ) added, 'Is 
what Dhul Yadain has said true?' They (the people) said, 'Yes, it is true.' The Prophet (ﷺ) stood up again 
and led the prayer, completing the remaining prayer, forgotten by him, and performed Taslim, and 
then said, 'Allahu Akbar.' And then he did a prostration as he used to prostrate or longer than that. He 
then raised his head saying, 'Allahu Akbar; he then again said, 'Allahu Akbar', and prostrated as he 
used to prostrate or longer than that. Then he raised his head and said, 'Allahu Akbar.' " (The subnarrator 
added, "I think that they asked (Ibn Seereen) whether the Prophet (ﷺ) completed the prayer with 
Taslim. He replied, "I heard that `Imran bin Husain had said, 'Then he (the Prophet) did Taslim.")
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 482

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Musa bin `Uqba said, "I saw Salim bin `Abdullah looking for some places on the way and prayed 
there. He narrated that his father used to pray there, and had seen the Prophet (ﷺ) praying at those very 
places." 
Narrated Nafi` on the authority of Ibn `Umar who said, "I used to pray at those places." Musa the 
narrator added, "I asked Salim on which he said, 'I agree with Nafi` concerning those places, except 
the mosque situated at the place called Sharaf Ar-Rawha."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 483

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: 
The narrated Hadith is about the various places on the way from Medina to Mecca where the Prophet (ﷺ) prayed and is not translated.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 484

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:
Hadith: See translation for hadith 484 above
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 485

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl (bin Sa`d):
Hadith: See translation for hadith 484 above
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 486

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salama:
Hadith: See translation for hadith 484 above
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 487

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: See translation for hadith 484 above
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 488

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:
Hadith: See translation for hadith 484 above
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 489

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas Ibn Malik:
Hadith: See translation for hadith 484 above
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 490

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
Hadith: See translation for hadith 484 above
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 491

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Yazid bin Al `Ubaid:
Hadith: See translation for hadith 484 above
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 492

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Once I came riding a she-ass when I had just attained the age of puberty. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was offering 
the prayer at Mina with no wall in front of him and I passed in front of some of the row. There I 
dismounted and let my she-ass loose to graze and entered the row and nobody objected to me about it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 493

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came out on `Id day, he used to order that a Harba [??] (a short spear) to be 
planted in front of him (as a Sutra for his prayer) and then he used to pray facing it with the people 
behind him and used to do the same while on a journey. After the Prophet (ﷺ) , this practice was adopted 
by the Muslim rulers (who followed his traditions).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 494

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: I heard my father saying, "The Prophet (ﷺ) led us, and prayed a two-rak`at Zuhr prayer and then a tworak` 
at `Asr prayer at Al-Batha' [??] with a short spear (planted) in front of him (as a Sutra) while 
women and donkeys were passing in front of him (beyond that stick).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 495

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Nafi':
Hadith: The distance between the Musalla of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and the wall was just sufficient for a sheep to 
pass through .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 496

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: The distance between the wall of the mosque and the pulpit was hardly enough for a sheep to pass 
through.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 497

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to get a Harba planted in front of him (as a Sutra) and pray behind it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 498

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id:
Hadith: that he had heard his father saying, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came to us at midday and water was brought for 
his ablution. He performed ablution and led us in Zuhr and `Asr prayers with a short stpear (or stick) 
planted in front of him (as a Sutra), while women and donkeys were passing beyond it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 499

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Busr bin Sa`id:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) went for answering the call of nature, I and another boy used to go after him 
with a staff, a stick or a short spear (or stick) and a tumbler of water and when he finished from 
answering the call of nature we would hand that tumbler of water to him.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 500

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came out at midday and offered a two-rak`at Zuhr and `Asr prayers at Al-Batha and a 
short spear (or stick) was planted in front of him (as a Sutra). He performed ablution and the people 
took the remaining water left after his ablution and rubbed their bodies with it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 501

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: I used to accompany Salama bin Al-Akwa` and he used to pray behind the pillar which was near the 
place where the Qur'ans were kept. I said, "O Abu Muslim! I see you always seeking to pray behind 
this pillar." He replied, "I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) always seeking to pray near that pillar."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 502

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: I saw the most famous people amongst the companions of the Prophet (ﷺ) hurrying towards the pillars at 
the Maghrib prayer before the Prophet (ﷺ) came for the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 503

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) entered the Ka`ba along with Usama bin Zaid, `Uthman bin Talha and Bilal and remained 
there for a long time. When they came out, I was the first man to enter the Ka`ba. I asked Bilal 
"Where did the Prophet (ﷺ) pray?" Bilal replied, "Between the two front Pillars."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 504

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: `Abdullah bin `Umar said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) entered the Ka`ba along with Usama bin Zaid, Bilal and 
`Uthman bin Talha Al-Hajabi and closed the door and stayed there for some time. I asked Bilal when 
he came out, 'What did the Prophet (ﷺ) do?' He replied, 'He offered prayer with one pillar to his left and 
one to his right and three behind.' In those days the Ka`ba was supported by six pillars." Malik said: 
"There were two pillars on his (the Prophet's) right side."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 505

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Qatada Al-Ansari:
Hadith: Whenever 'Abdullah entered the Ka'bah, he used to go ahead leaving the door of the Ka'bah behind him. He would proceed on till the remaining distance between him and the opposite wall about three cubits. Then he would off prayer there where the Prophet (ﷺ) had offered Salat, as Bilal informed me. Ibn 'Umar said, "It does not matter for any of us to offer prayers at any place inside the Ka'bah."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 506

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna bint Al-Harith:
Hadith: "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to make his she-camel sit across and he would pray facing it (as a Sutra)." I asked, 
"What would the Prophet (ﷺ) do if the she-camel was provoked and moved?" He said, "He would take its 
camel-saddle and put it in front of him and pray facing its back part (as a Sutra). And Ibn `Umar used 
to do the same." (This indicates that one should not pray except behind a Sutra).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 507

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Maimuna:
Hadith: Do you make us (women) equal to dogs and donkeys? While I used to lie in my bed, the Prophet (ﷺ) 
would come and pray facing the middle of the bed. I used to consider it not good to stand in front of 
him in his prayers. So I used to slip away slowly and quietly from the foot of the bed till I got out of 
my guilt.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 508

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, (what is ascribed to him in the following Hadith):
Narrated Abu Salih As-Samman:

I saw Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri praying on a Friday, behind something which acted as a Sutra. A young 
man from Bani Abi Mu'ait [??] , wanted to pass in front of him, but Abu Sa`id repulsed him with a 
push on his chest. Finding no alternative he again tried to pass but Abu Sa`id pushed him with a 
greater force. The young man abused Abu Sa`id and went to Marwan and lodged a complaint against 
Abu Sa`id and Abu Sa`id followed the young man to Marwan who asked him, "O Abu Sa`id! What 
has happened between you and the son of your brother?" Abu Sa`id said to him, "I heard the Prophet (ﷺ) 
saying, 'If anybody amongst you is praying behind something as a Sutra and somebody tries to pass in 
front of him, then he should repulse him and if he refuses, he should use force against him for he is a 
Shaitan (a Satan).' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 509

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr bin Maimun [??]:
Hadith: that Zaid bin Khalid sent him to Abi Juhaim to ask him what he had heard from Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about 
a person passing in front of another person who was praying. Abu Juhaim replied, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
said, 'If the person who passes in front of another person in prayer knew the magnitude of his sin he 
would prefer to wait for 40 (days, months or years) rather than to pass in front of him." Abu An-Nadr 
said, "I do not remember exactly whether he said 40 days, months or years."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 510

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Shihab:
Hadith: Once `Umar bin `Abdul `Aziz delayed the prayer and `Urwa bin Az-Zubair went to him and said, 
"Once in 'Iraq, Al-Mughira bin Shu`ba delayed his prayers and Abi Mas`ud Al-Ansari went to him 
and said, 'O Mughira! What is this? Don't you know that once Gabriel came and offered the prayer 
(Fajr prayer) and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) prayed too, then he prayed again (Zuhr prayer) and so did Allah's 
Apostle and again he prayed (`Asr prayers and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) did the same; again he prayed 
(Maghrib-prayer) and so did Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and again prayed (`Isha prayer) and so did Allah's 
Apostle and (Gabriel) said, 'I was ordered to do so (to demonstrate the prayers prescribed to you)?'" 
`Umar (bin `Abdul `Aziz) said to `Urwa, "Be sure of what you Say. Did Gabriel lead Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
at the stated times of the prayers?" `Urwa replied, "Bashir bin Abi Mas`ud narrated like this on the 
authority of his father." `Urwa added, "Aisha told me that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to pray `Asr prayer 
when the sunshine was still inside her residence (during the early time of `Asr).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 521, 522

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: "Once a delegation of `Abdul Qais came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said, "We belong to such and such 
branch of the tribe of Rabi'ah and we can only come to you in the sacred months. Order us to do 
something good so that we may take it from you and also invite to it those whom we have left behind (at home)." So he said, "I order you to do four things and forbid you from four 
things:  To believe in Allah" - and then he explained it to them "to testify that none has the right to be 
worshipped but Allah and that I am Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), to establish the prayers (at the stated times), to pay the Zakat (obligatory charity), to hand me the Khumus (fifth) if you acquire spoils of war. And I forbid from (using) Dubba, Hantam, Muqaiyyar, and Naqir (all these were utensils used for the preparation of alcoholic drinks).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 523

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jarir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) for to offer prayers perfectly, to pay Zakat regularly, 
and to give good advice to every Muslim.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 524

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Shaqiq:
Hadith: that he had heard Hudhaifa saying, "Once I was sitting with `Umar and he said, 'Who amongst you 
remembers the statement of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about the afflictions?' I said, 'I know it as the Prophet (ﷺ) had 
said it.' `Umar said, 'No doubt you are bold.' I said, 'The afflictions caused for a man by his wife, 
money, children and neighbor are expiated by his prayers, fasting, charity and by enjoining (what is 
good) and forbidding (what is evil).' `Umar said, 'I did not mean that but I asked about that affliction 
which will spread like the waves of the sea.' I (Hudhaifa) said, 'O leader of the faithful believers! You 
need not be afraid of it as there is a closed door between you and it.' `Umar asked, Will the door be 
broken or opened?' I replied, 'It will be broken.' `Umar said, 'Then it will never be closed again.' I was 
asked whether `Umar knew that door. I replied that he knew it as one knows that there will be night 
before the tomorrow morning. I narrated a Hadith that was free from any misstatement" The subnarrator 
added that they deputized Masruq to ask Hudhaifa (about the door). Hudhaifa said, "The door 
was `Umar himself."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 525

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Mas`ud:
Hadith: A man kissed a woman (unlawfully) and then went to the Prophet (ﷺ) and informed him. Allah revealed: 
And offer prayers perfectly At the two ends of the day And in some hours of the night (i.e. the five 
compulsory prayers). Verily! good deeds remove (annul) the evil deeds (small sins) (11.114). The 
man asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), "Is it for me?" He said, "It is for all my followers."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 526

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: I asked the Prophet (ﷺ) "Which deed is the dearest to Allah?" He replied, "To offer the prayers at their 
early stated fixed times." I asked, "What is the next (in goodness)?" He replied, "To be good and 
dutiful to your parents" I again asked, "What is the next (in goodness)?" He replied, 'To participate in 
Jihad (religious fighting) in Allah's cause." `Abdullah added, "I asked only that much and if I had 
asked more, the Prophet (ﷺ) would have told me more."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 527

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, "If there was a river at the door of anyone of you and he took a bath in 
it five times a day would you notice any dirt on him?" They said, "Not a trace of dirt would be left." 
The Prophet (ﷺ) added, "That is the example of the five prayers with which Allah blots out (annuls) evil 
deeds."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 528

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Ghailan:
Hadith: 

     Anas said, "I do not find (now-a-days) things as they were (practiced)
     at the time of the Prophet." Somebody said "The prayer (is as it 
     was.)" Anas said, "Have you not done in the prayer what you have 
     done?
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 529

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri that he visited Anas bin Malik at Damascus and found
     him weeping and asked him why he was weeping. He replied, "I do not 
     know anything which I used to know during the life-time of Allah's 
     Apostle except this prayer which is being lost (not offered as it 
     should be)."

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 530

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whenever anyone of you offers his prayer he is speaking in private to his Lord. So 
he should not spit to his right but under his left foot." Qatada said, "He should not spit in front of him 
but to his left or under his feet." And Shu`ba said, "He should not spit in front of him, nor to his right 
but to his left or under his foot." Anas said: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "He should neither spit in the direction 
of his Qibla nor to his right but to his left or under his foot."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 531

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira and `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Do the prostration properly and do not put your forearms flat with elbows touching 
the ground like a dog. And if you want to spit, do not spit in front, nor to the right for the person in 
prayer is speaking in private to his Lord."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 532

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Dhar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If it is very hot, then pray the Zuhr prayer when it becomes (a bit) cooler, as the 
severity of the heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 533, 534

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Mu'adh-dhin (call-maker) of the Prophet (ﷺ) pronounced the Adhan (call) for the Zuhr prayer but the 
Prophet said, "Let it be cooler, let it be cooler." Or said, 'Wait, wait, because the severity of heat is 
from the raging of the Hell-fire. In severe hot weather, pray when it becomes (a bit) cooler and the 
shadows of hillocks appear."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 535

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "In very hot weather delay the Zuhr prayer till it becomes (a bit) cooler because the 
severity of heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire. The Hell-fire of Hell complained to its Lord saying: 
O Lord! My parts are eating (destroying) one another. So Allah allowed it to take two breaths, one in 
the winter and the other in the summer. The breath in the summer is at the time when you feel the 
severest heat and the breath in the winter is at the time when you feel the severest cold."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 536, 537

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Dhar Al-Ghifar:
Hadith: that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Pray Zuhr prayer when it becomes (a bit) cooler as the severity of heat is 
from the raging of the Hell-fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 538

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: We were with the Prophet (ﷺ) on a journey and the Mu'adh-dhin (call maker for the prayer) wanted to 
pronounce the Adhan (call) for the Zuhr prayer. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'Let it become cooler." He again 
(after a while) wanted to pronounce the Adhan but the Prophet (ﷺ) said to him, "Let it become cooler till 
we see the shadows of hillocks." The Prophet (ﷺ) added, "The severity of heat is from the raging of the 
Hell-fire, and in very hot weather pray (Zuhr) when it becomes cooler."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 539

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Al-Minhal:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came out as the sun declined at midday and offered the Zuhr prayer. He then stood on 
the pulpit and spoke about the Hour (Day of Judgment) and said that in it there would be tremendous 
things. He then said, "Whoever likes to ask me about anything he can do so and I shall reply as long as 
I am at this place of mine. Most of the people wept and the Prophet (ﷺ) said repeatedly, "Ask me." 
`Abdullah bin Hudhafa As-Sahmi stood up and said, "Who is my father?" The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Your 
father is Hudhafa." The Prophet (ﷺ) repeatedly said, "Ask me." Then `Umar knelt before him and said, 
"We are pleased with Allah as our Lord, Islam as our religion, and Muhammad as our Prophet." The 
Prophet then became quiet and said, "Paradise and Hell-fire were displayed in front of me on this wall 
just now and I have never seen a better thing (than the former) and a worse thing (than the latter).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 540

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Abu Barza said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer the Fajr (prayer) when one could recognize the person 
sitting by him (after the prayer) and he used to recite between 60 to 100 Ayat (verses) of the Qur'an. 
He used to offer the Zuhr prayer as soon as the sun declined (at noon) and the `Asr at a time when a 
man might go and return from the farthest place in Medina and find the sun still hot. (The sub-narrator 
forgot what was said about the Maghrib). He did not mind delaying the `Isha prayer to one third of the 
night or the middle of the night."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 541

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: When we offered the Zuhr prayers behind Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) we used to prostrate on our clothes to 
protect ourselves from the heat.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 542

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: "The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed eight rak`at for the Zuhr and `Asr, and seven for the Maghrib and `Isha prayers 
in Medina." Aiyub said, "Perhaps those were rainy nights." Anas said, "May be."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 543

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to offer the `Asr prayer when the sunshine had not disappeared from my 
chamber.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 544

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to offer the `Asr prayers at a time when the sunshine was still inside my chamber 
and no shadow had yet appeared in it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 545

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Saiyar bin Salama:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to pray the `Asr prayers at a time when the sunshine was still inside my chamber 
and no shadow had yet appeared in it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 546

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: I along with my father went to Abu- Barza Al-Aslami and my father asked him, "How Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
used to offer the five compulsory congregational prayers?" Abu- Barza said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to 
pray the Zuhr prayer which you (people) call the first one at midday when the sun had just declined 
The `Asr prayer at a time when after the prayer, a man could go to the house at the farthest place in 
Medina (and arrive) while the sun was still hot. (I forgot about the Maghrib prayer). The Prophet (ﷺ) 
Loved to delay the `Isha which you call Al- `Atama [??] and he disliked sleeping before it and 
speaking after it. After the Fajr prayer he used to leave when a man could recognize the one sitting 
beside him and he used to recite between 60 to 100 Ayat (in the Fajr prayer) .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 547

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Bakr bin `Uthman bin Sahl bin Hunaif:
Hadith: We used to pray the `Asr prayer and after that if someone happened to go to the tribe of Bani `Amr 
bin `Auf, he would find them still praying the `Asr (prayer).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 548

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: that he heard Abu Umama saying: We prayed the Zuhr prayer with `Umar bin `Abdul `Aziz and then 
went to Anas bin Malik and found him offering the `Asr prayer. I asked him, "O uncle! Which prayer 
have you offered?" He said 'The `Asr and this is (the time of) the prayer of Allah s Apostle which we 
used to pray with him."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 549

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to offer the `Asr prayer at a time when the sun was still hot and high and if a 
person went to Al-`Awali (a place) of Medina, he would reach there when the sun was still high. Some 
of Al-`Awali of Medina were about four miles or so from the town.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 550

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: We used to pray the `Asr and after that if one of US went to Quba' he would arrive there while the sun 
was still high.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 551

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Al-Mahh [??]:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whoever misses the `Asr prayer (intentionally) then it is as if he lost his family 
and property."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 552

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Qais:
Hadith: We were with Buraida in a battle on a cloudy day and he said, "Offer the `Asr prayer early as the 
Prophet said, "Whoever leaves the `Asr prayer, all his (good) deeds will be annulled."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 553

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Jarir said, "We were with the Prophet (ﷺ) and he looked at the moon--full-moon--and said, 'Certainly you 
will see your Lord as you see this moon and you will have no trouble in seeing Him. So if you can 
avoid missing (through sleep or business, etc.) a prayer before the sunrise (Fajr) and a prayer before 
sunset (`Asr), you must do so.' He then recited Allah's Statement: 
And celebrate the praises Of your Lord before the rising of the sun and before (its) setting." (50.39) 
Isma`il said, "Offer those prayers and do not miss them."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 554

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Angels come to you in succession by night and day and all of them get together 
at the time of the Fajr and `Asr prayers. Those who have passed the night with you (or stayed with 
you) ascend (to the Heaven) and Allah asks them, though He knows everything about you, well, "In 
what state did you leave my slaves?" The angels reply: "When we left them they were praying and 
when we reached them, they were praying."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 555

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salim bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If anyone of you can get one rak`a of the `Asr prayer before sunset, he should 
complete his prayer. If any of you can get one rak`a of the Fajr prayer before sunrise, he should 
complete his prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 556

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: My father said, "I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, 'The period of your stay as compared to the previous 
nations is like the period equal to the time between the `Asr prayer and sunset. The people of the 
Torah were given the Torah and they acted (upon it) till midday then they were exhausted and were 
given one Qirat (of gold) each. And then the people of the Gospel were given the Gospel and they 
acted (upon it) till the `Asr prayer then they were exhausted and were! given one Qirat each. And then 
we were given the Qur'an and we acted (upon it) till sunset and we were given two Qirats each. On 
that the people of both the scriptures said, 'O our Lord! You have given them two Qirats and given us 
one Qirat, though we have worked more than they.' Allah said, 'Have I usurped some of your right?' 
They said, 'No.' Allah said: "That is my blessing I bestow upon whomsoever I wish."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 557

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Rafi` bin Khadij:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The example of Muslims, Jews and Christians is like the example of a man who 
employed laborers to work for him from morning till night. They worked till midday and they said, 
'We are not in need of your reward.' So the man employed another batch and said to them, 'Complete 
the rest of the day and yours will be the wages I had fixed (for the first batch). They worked until the 
time of the `Asr prayer and said, 'Whatever we have done is for you.' He employed another batch. 
They worked for the rest of the day till sunset, and they received the wages of the two former 
batches."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 558

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: We used to offer the Maghrib prayer with the Prophet (ﷺ) and after finishing the prayer one of us may go 
away and could still see as Par as the spots where one's arrow might reach when shot by a bow.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 559

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salama:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to pray the Zuhr at midday, and the `Asr at a time when the sun was still bright, the 
Maghrib after sunset (at its stated time) and the `Isha at a variable time. Whenever he saw the people 
assembled (for `Isha' prayer) he would pray earlier and if the people delayed, he would delay the 
prayer. And they or the Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer the Fajr Prayers when it still dark.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 560

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: We used to pray the Maghrib prayer with the Prophet (ﷺ) when the sun disappeared from the horizon.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 561

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah Al-Muzani:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed seven rak`at together and eight rak`at together.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 562

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Do not be influenced by bedouins regarding the name of your Maghrib prayer 
which is called `Isha' by them."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 563

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin `Amr:
Hadith: "One night Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) led us in the `Isha' prayer and that is the one called Al-`Atma [??] by the 
people. After the completion of the prayer, he faced us and said, "Do you know the importance of this 
night? Nobody present on the surface of the earth tonight will be living after one hundred years from 
this night." (See Hadith No. 575).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 564

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: We asked Jabir bin `Abdullah about the prayers of the Prophet (ﷺ) . He said, "He used to pray Zuhr prayer 
at midday, the `Asr when the sun was still hot, and the Maghrib after sunset (at its stated time). The 
`Isha was offered early if the people gathered, and used to be delayed if their number was less; and the 
morning prayer was offered when it was still dark. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 565

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) once delayed the `Isha' prayer and that was during the days when Islam still had not 
spread. The Prophet (ﷺ) did not come out till `Umar informed him that the women and children had slept. 
Then he came out and said to the people of the mosque: "None amongst the dwellers of the earth has 
been waiting for it (`Isha prayer) except you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 566

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Barza:
Hadith: My companions, who came with me in the boat and I landed at a place called Baqi [??] Buthan [??] . 
The Prophet (ﷺ) was in Medina at that time. One of us used to go to the Prophet (ﷺ) by turns every night at 
the time of the `Isha prayer. Once I along with my companions went to the Prophet (ﷺ) and he was busy in 
some of his affairs, so the `Isha' prayer was delayed to the middle of the night He then came out and 
led the people (in prayer). After finishing from the prayer, he addressed the people present there 
saying, "Be patient! Don't go away. Have the glad tiding. It is from the blessing of Allah upon you 
that none amongst mankind has prayed at this time save you." Or said, "None except you has prayed 
at this time." Abu Musa added, 'So we returned happily after what we heard from Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 567

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Shihab from `Urwa:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) disliked to sleep before the `Isha' prayer and to talk after it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 568

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Juraij from Nafi`:
Hadith: `Aisha said, "Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) delayed the `Isha' prayer till `Umar reminded him by saying, "The 
prayer!" The women and children have slept. Then the Prophet (ﷺ) came out and said, 'None amongst the 
dwellers of the earth has been waiting for it (the prayer) except you." `Urwa said, "Nowhere except in 
Medina the prayer used to be offered (in those days)." He further said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer the 
`Isha' prayer in the period between the disappearance of the twilight and the end of the first third of 
the night."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 569

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: `Abdullah bin `Umar said, "Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was busy (at the time of the `Isha'), so the prayer 
was delayed so much so that we slept and woke up and slept and woke up again. The Prophet (ﷺ) came 
out and said, 'None amongst the dwellers of the earth but you have been waiting for the prayer." Ibn 
`Umar did not find any harm in praying it earlier or in delaying it unless he was afraid that sleep might 
overwhelm him and he might miss the prayer, and sometimes he used to sleep before the `Isha' prayer. 
Ibn Juraij said, "I said to `Ata', 'I heard Ibn `Abbas saying: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) delayed the `Isha' 
prayer to such an extent that the people slept and got up and slept again and got up again. Then `Umar 
bin Al-Khattab I, stood up and reminded the Prophet (ﷺ) I of the prayer.' `Ata' said, 'Ibn `Abbas said: The 
Prophet came out as if I was looking at him at this time, and water was trickling from his head and he 
was putting his hand on his head and then said, 'Hadn't I thought it hard for my followers, I would 
have ordered them to pray (`Isha' prayer) at this time.' I asked `Ata' for further information, how the 
Prophet had kept his hand on his head as he was told by Ibn `Abbas. `Ata' separated his fingers 
slightly and put their tips on the side of the head, brought the fingers downwards approximating them 
till the thumb touched the lobe of the ear at the side of the temple and the beard on the face. He neither 
slowed nor hurried in this action but he acted like that. The Prophet (ﷺ) said: "Hadn't I thought it hard for 
my followers I would have ordered them to pray at this time."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 570, 571

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jarir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) delayed the `Isha' prayer till midnight and then he offered the prayer and said, "The 
people prayed and slept but you have been in prayer as long as you have been waiting for it (the 
prayer)." Anas added: As if I am looking now at the glitter of the ring of the Prophet (ﷺ) on that night.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 572

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Bakr bin Abi Musa:
Hadith: We were with the Prophet (ﷺ) on a full moon night. He looked at the moon and said, "You will certainly 
see your Lord as you see this moon, and there will be no trouble in seeing Him. So if you can avoid 
missing (through sleep, business, etc.) a prayer before the rising of the sun (Fajr) and before its setting 
(`Asr) you must do so. He (the Prophet (ﷺ) ) then recited the following verse: 
And celebrate the praises Of Your Lord before The rising of the sun And before (its) setting." (50.39)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 573

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: My father said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, 'Whoever prays the two cool prayers (`Asr and Fajr) will go to 
Paradise.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 574

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Qatada:
Hadith: Zaid bin Thabit said, "We took the "Suhur" (the meal taken before dawn while fasting is observed) 
with the Prophet (ﷺ) and then stood up for the (morning) prayer." I asked him how long the interval 
between the two (Suhur and prayer) was. He replied, 'The interval between the two was just sufficient 
to recite fifty to Sixth 'Ayat."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 575

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl bin Sa`d:
Hadith: Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) and Zaid bin Thabit took the 'Suhur' together and after finishing 
the meal, the Prophet (ﷺ) stood up and prayed (Fajr prayer)." I asked Anas, "How long was the interval 
between finishing their 'Suhur' and starting the prayer?" He replied, "The interval between the two 
was just sufficient to recite fifty 'Ayat." (Verses of the Qur'an).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 576

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: I used to take the "Suhur" meal with my family and hasten so as to catch the Fajr (morning prayer) 
with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 577

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The believing women covered with their veiling sheets used to attend the Fajr prayer with Allah's 
Apostle, and after finishing the prayer they would return to their home and nobody could recognize 
them because of darkness.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 578

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whoever could get one rak`a (of the Fajr prayer) before sunrise, he has got the 
(morning) prayer and whoever could get one rak`a of the `Asr prayer before sunset, he has got the 
(`Asr) prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 579

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whoever could get one rak`a of a prayer, (in its proper time) he has got the 
prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 580

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hisham's father:
Hadith: "The Prophet (ﷺ) forbade praying after the Fajr prayer till the sun rises and after the `Asr prayer till the 
sun sets."


Narrated Ibn `Abbas:

Some people told me the same narration (as above).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 581

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Ibn `Umar said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, 'Do not pray at the time of sunrise and at the time of sunset.' " 
Ibn `Umar said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, 'If the edge of the sun appears (above the horizon) delay the 
prayer till it becomes high, and if the edge of the sun disappears, delay the prayer till it sets 
(disappears completely).' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 582, 583

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) forbade two kinds of sales, two kinds of dresses, and two prayers. He forbade offering 
prayers after the Fajr prayer till the rising of the sun and after the `Asr prayer till its setting. He also 
forbade "Ishtimal-Assama [??] " and "al-Ihtiba" in one garment in such a way that one's private parts 
are exposed towards the sky. He also forbade the sales called "Munabadha" and "Mulamasa." (See 
Hadith No. 354 and 355 Vol. 3).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 584

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "None of you should try to pray at sunrise or sunset."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 585

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muawiya:
Hadith: I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, "There is no prayer after the morning prayer till the sun rises, and there 
is no prayer after the `Asr prayer till the sun sets."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 586

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: You offer a prayer which I did not see being offered by Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) when we were in his company 
and he certainly had forbidden it (i.e. two rak`at after the `Asr prayer).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 587

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) forbade the offering of two prayers: 
-1. after the morning prayer till the sunrises. 
-2. after the `Asr prayer till the sun sets.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 588

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: I pray as I saw my companions praying. I do not forbid praying at any time during the day or night 
except at sunset and sunrise.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 589

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hisham's father:
Hadith: By Allah, Who took away the Prophet. The Prophet (ﷺ) never missed them (two rak`at) after the `Asr 
prayer till he met Allah and he did not meet Allah till it became heavy for him to pray while standing 
so he used to offer most of the prayers while sitting. (She meant the two rak`at after `Asr) He used to 
pray them in the house and never prayed them in the mosque lest it might be hard for his followers 
and he loved what was easy for them .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 590

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: `Aisha (addressing me) said, "O son of my sister! The Prophet (ﷺ) never missed two prostrations (i.e. 
rak`at) after the `Asr prayer in my house."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 591

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) never missed two rak`at before the Fajr prayer and after the `Asr prayer openly and 
secretly.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 592

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Abu Malih [??]:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) come to me after the `Asr prayer, he always prayed two rak`at.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 593

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
Hadith: I was with Buraida on a cloudy day and he said, "Offer the `Asr prayer earlier as the Prophet (ﷺ) said, 
'Whoever leaves the `Asr prayer will have all his (good) deeds annulled." (See Hadith No. 527 and 
528)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 594

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: My father said, "One night we were traveling with the Prophet (ﷺ) and some people said, 'We wish that 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) would take a rest along with us during the last hours of the night.' He said, 'I am afraid 
that you will sleep and miss the (Fajr) prayer.' Bilal said, 'I will make you get up.' So all slept and 
Bilal rested his back against his Rahila and he too was overwhelmed (by sleep) and slept. The Prophet (ﷺ) 
got up when the edge of the sun had risen and said, 'O Bilal! What about your statement?' He replied, 
'I have never slept such a sleep.' The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'Allah captured your souls when He wished, and 
released them when He wished. O Bilal! Get up and pronounce the Adhan for the prayer.' The Prophet (ﷺ) 
performed ablution and when the sun came up and became bright, he stood up and prayed."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 595

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: On the day of Al-Khandaq (the battle of trench.) `Umar bin Al-Khattab came cursing the disbelievers 
of Quraish after the sun had set and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I could not offer the `Asr prayer till the 
sun had set." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "By Allah! I, too, have not prayed." So we turned towards Buthan, and 
the Prophet (ﷺ) performed ablution and we too performed ablution and offered the `Asr prayer after the 
sun had set, and then he offered the Maghrib prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 596

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "If anyone forgets a prayer he should pray that prayer when he remembers it. There 
is no expiation except to pray the same." Then he recited: "Establish prayer for My (i.e. Allah's) 
remembrance." (20.14).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 597

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu-l-Minhal:
Hadith: `Umar came cursing the disbelievers (of Quraish) on the day of Al-Khandaq (the battle of Trench) and 
said, "I could not offer the `Asr prayer till the sun had set. Then we went to Buthan and he offered the 
(`Asr) prayer after sunset and then he offered the Maghrib prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 598

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Qurra bin Khalid:
Hadith: My father and I went to Abi Barza Al-Aslami and my father said to him, "Tell us how Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
used to offer the compulsory congregational prayers." He said, "He used to pray the Zuhr prayer, 
which you call the first prayer, as the sun declined at noon, the `Asr at a time when one of US could 
go to his family at the farthest place in Medina while the sun was still hot. (The narrator forgot what 
Abu Barza had said about the Maghrib prayer), and the Prophet (ﷺ) preferred to pray the `Isha' late and 
disliked to sleep before it or talk after it. And he used to return after finishing the morning prayer at 
such a time when it was possible for one to recognize the person sitting by his side and he (the 
Prophet) used to recite 60 to 100 'Ayat' (verses) of the Qur'an in it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 599

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Once he waited for Al-Hasan and he did not show up till it was about the usual time for him to start 
his speech; then he came and apologized saying, "Our neighbors invited us." Then he added, 
"Narrated Anas, 'Once we waited for the Prophet (ﷺ) till it was midnight or about midnight. He came and 
led the prayer, and after finishing it, he addressed us and said, 'All the people prayed and then slept 
and you had been in prayer as long as you were waiting for it." Al-Hasan said, "The people are 
regarded as performing good deeds as long as they are waiting for doing good deeds." Al-Hasan's 
statement is a portion of Anas's [??] Hadith from the Prophet (ﷺ) .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 600

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu `Uthman:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed one of the `Isha' prayer in his last days and after finishing it with Taslim, he stood 
up and said, "Do you realize (the importance of) this night? Nobody present on the 
surface of the earth tonight would be living after the completion of one hundred years from this 
night." 
The people made a mistake in grasping the meaning of this statement of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and they 
indulged in those things which are said about these narrators (i.e. some said that the Day of 
Resurrection will be established after 100 years etc.) But the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Nobody present on the 
surface of earth tonight would be living after the completion of 100 years from this night"; he meant 
"When that century (people of that century) would pass away."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 601

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The people mentioned the fire and the bell (they suggested those as signals to indicate the starting of 
prayers), and by that they mentioned the Jews and the Christians. Then Bilal was ordered to 
pronounce Adhan for the prayer by saying its wordings twice, and for the Iqama (the call for the 
actual standing for the prayers in rows) by saying its wordings once. (Iqama is pronounced when the 
people are ready for the prayer).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 603

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: When the Muslims arrived at Medina, they used to assemble for the prayer, and used to guess the time 
for it. During those days, the practice of Adhan for the prayers had not been introduced yet. Once they 
discussed this problem regarding the call for prayer. Some people suggested the use of a bell like the 
Christians, others proposed a trumpet like the horn used by the Jews, but `Umar was the first to 
suggest that a man should call (the people) for the prayer; so Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ordered Bilal to get up 
and pronounce the Adhan for prayers.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 604

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Bilal was ordered to repeat the wording of the Adhan for prayers twice, and to pronounce the wording 
of the Iqama once except "Qad-qamat-is-salat".
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 605

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: When the number of Muslims increased they discussed the question as to how to know the time for 
the prayer by some familiar means. Some suggested that a fire be lit (at the time of the prayer) and 
others put forward the proposal to ring the bell. Bilal was ordered to pronounce the wording of Adhan 
twice and of the Iqama once only.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 606

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
Hadith: Anas said, "Bilal was ordered to pronounce the wording of Adhan twice and of Iqama once only." The 
sub narrator Isma`il said, "I mentioned that to Aiyub and he added (to that), "Except Iqama (i.e. Qadqamat- 
is-salat which should be said twice).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 607

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "When the Adhan is pronounced Satan takes to his heels and passes wind with 
noise during his flight in order not to hear the Adhan. When the Adhan is completed he comes back 
and again takes to his heels when the Iqama is pronounced and after its completion he returns again 
till he whispers into the heart of the person (to divert his attention from his prayer) and makes him 
remember things which he does not recall to his mind before the prayer and that causes him to forget 
how much he has prayed."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 608

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdur-Rahman:
Hadith: Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri told my father, "I see you liking sheep and the wilderness. So whenever you are 
with your sheep or in the wilderness and you want to pronounce Adhan for the prayer raise your voice 
in doing so, for whoever hears the Adhan, whether a human being, a jinn or any other creature, will be 
a witness for you on the Day of Resurrection." Abu Sa`id added, "I heard it (this narration) from 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 609

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Humaid:
Hadith: Anas bin Malik said, "Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) went out with us to fight (in Allah's cause) against any 
nation, he never allowed us to attack till morning and he would wait and see: if he heard Adhan he 
would postpone the attack and if he did not hear Adhan he would attack them." Anas added, "We 
reached Khaibar at night and in the morning when he did not hear the Adhan for the prayer, he (the 
Prophet ) rode and I rode behind Abi Talha and my foot was touching that of the Prophet. 
The inhabitants of Khaibar came out with their baskets and spades and when they saw the Prophet (ﷺ) 
they shouted 'Muhammad! By Allah, Muhammad and his army.' When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saw them, he 
said, "Allahu-Akbar! Allahu-Akbar! Khaibar is ruined. Whenever we approach a (hostile) nation (to 
fight), then evil will be the morning of those who have been warned."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 610

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whenever you hear the Adhan, say what the Mu'adh-dhin is saying.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 611

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Isa bin Talha:
Hadith: that he had heard Muawiya repeating the words of Adhan up to "Wa ash-hadu anna Muhammadan 
rasulul-lah (and I testify that Muhammad is Allah's Messenger (ﷺ).)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 612

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Yahya as above (586) and added:
Hadith: "Some of my companions told me that Hisham had said, "When the Mu'adh-dhin said, "Haiyi `alassala 
(come for the prayer)." Muawiya said, "La hawla wala quwata illa billah (There is neither might 
nor any power except with Allah)" and added, "We heard your Prophet saying the same."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 613

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whoever after listening to the Adhan says, 'Allahumma Rabba hadhihi-dda` 
watit-tammah, was-salatil qa'imah, ati Muhammadan al-wasilata wal-fadilah, wa b`ath-hu 
maqaman mahmudan-il-ladhi wa`adtahu' [O Allah! Lord of this perfect call (perfect by not ascribing 
partners to You) and of the regular prayer which is going to be established, give Muhammad the right 
of intercession and illustriousness, and resurrect him to the best and the highest place in Paradise that 
You promised him (of)], then my intercession for him will be allowed on the Day of Resurrection".
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 614

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If the people knew the reward for pronouncing the Adhan and for standing in 
the first row (in congregational prayers) and found no other way to get that except by drawing lots 
they would draw lots, and if they knew the reward of the Zuhr prayer (in the early moments of its 
stated time) they would race for it (go early) and if they knew the reward of `Isha' and Fajr (morning) 
prayers in congregation, they would come to offer them even if they had to crawl."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 615

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Al-Harith:
Hadith: Once on a rainy muddy day, Ibn `Abbas delivered a sermon in our presence and when the Mu'adhdhin 
pronounced the Adhan and said, "Haiyi `ala-s-sala(t) (come for the prayer)" Ibn `Abbas ordered 
him to say 'Pray at your homes.' The people began to look at each other (surprisingly). Ibn `Abbas 
said. "It was done by one who was much better than I (i.e. the Prophet (ﷺ) or his Mu'adh-dhin), and it is a 
license.'
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 616

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salim bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: My father said that Allah s Apostle said, "Bilal pronounces 'Adhan at night, so keep on eating and 
drinking (Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces Adhan." Salim added, "He was a blind man who 
would not pronounce the Adhan unless he was told that the day had dawned."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 617

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hafsa:
Hadith: When the Mu'adh-dhin pronounced the Adhan for Fajr prayer and the dawn became evident the 
Prophet ordered a two rak`at light prayer (Sunna) before the Iqama of the compulsory 
(congregational) prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 618

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer two light rak`at between the Adhan and the Iqama of the Fajr prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 619

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Bilal pronounces the Adhan at night, so keep on eating and drinking (Suhur) till 
Ibn Um Maktum pronounces the Adhan."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 620

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Mas`ud:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The Adhan pronounced by Bilal should not stop you from taking Suhur, for he 
pronounces the Adhan at night, so that the one offering the late night prayer (Tahajjud) from among 
you might hurry up and the sleeping from among you might wake up. It does not mean that dawn or 
morning has started." Then he (the Prophet) pointed with his fingers and raised them up (towards the 
sky) and then lowered them (towards the earth) like this (Ibn Mas`ud imitated the gesture of the 
Prophet). Az-Zuhri gestured with his two index fingers which he put on each other and then stretched 
them to the right and left. These gestures illustrate the way real dawn appears. It spreads left and right 
horizontally. The dawn that appears in the high sky and lowers down is not the real dawn) .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 621

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Bilal pronounces the Adhan at night, so eat and drink (Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum 
pronounces the Adhan."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 622, 623

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Mughaffal Al-Muzani:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said thrice, "There is a prayer between the two Adhans (Adhan and Iqama)," and 
added, "For the one who wants to pray."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 624

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: "When the Mu'adh-dhin pronounced the Adhan, some of the companions of the Prophet (ﷺ) would 
proceed to the pillars of the mosque (for the prayer) till the Prophet (ﷺ) arrived and in this way they used 
to pray two rak`at before the Maghrib prayer. There used to be a little time between the Adhan and the 
Iqama." Shu`ba said, "There used to be a very short interval between the two (Adhan and Iqama).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 625

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to pray two light rak`at before the morning (compulsory) prayer after the day 
dawned and the Mu'adh-dhin had finished his Adhan. He then would lie on his right side till the 
Mu'adh-dhin came to pronounce the Iqama.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 626

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Mughaffal:
Hadith: The prophet said, "There is a prayer between the two Adhans (Adhan and Iqama), there is a prayer 
between the two Adhans." And then while saying it the third time he added, "For the one who wants 
to (pray).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 627

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Malik bin Huwairith:
Hadith: I came to the Prophet (ﷺ) with some men from my tribe and stayed with him for twenty nights. He was 
kind and merciful to us. When he realized our longing for our families, he said to us, "Go back and 
stay with your families and teach them the religion, and offer the prayer and one of you should 
pronounce the Adhan for the prayer when its time is due and the oldest one amongst you should lead 
the prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 628

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Dhar:
Hadith: We were in the company of the Prophet (ﷺ) on a journey and the Mu'adh-dhin wanted to pronounce the 
Adhan for the (Zuhr) prayer. The Prophet (ﷺ) said to him, "Let it become cooler." Then he again wanted 
to pronounce the Adhan but the Prophet; said to him, "Let it become cooler." The Mu'adh-dhin again 
wanted to pronounce the Adhan for the prayer but the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Let it become cooler," till the 
shadows of the hillocks become equal to their sizes. The Prophet (ﷺ) added, "The severity of the heat is 
from the raging of Hell."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 629

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Malik bin Huwairith:
Hadith: Two men came to the Prophet (ﷺ) with the intention of a journey. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When (both of) you 
set out, pronounce Adhan and then Iqama and the oldest of you should lead the prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 630

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Malik:
Hadith: We came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and stayed with him for twenty days and nights. We were all young and of 
about the same age. The Prophet (ﷺ) was very kind and merciful. When he realized our longing for our 
families, he asked about our homes and the people there and we told him. Then he asked us to go back 
to our families and stay with them and teach them (the religion) and to order them to do good things. 
He also mentioned some other things which I have (remembered or [??] ) forgotten. The Prophet (ﷺ) then 
added, "Pray as you have seen me praying and when it is the time for the prayer one of you should 
pronounce the Adhan and the oldest of you should lead the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 631

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: Once in a cold night, Ibn `Umar pronounced the Adhan for the prayer at Dajnan (the name of a 
mountain) and then said, "Pray at your homes", and informed us that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to tell the 
Mu'adh-dhin to pronounce Adhan and say, "Pray at your homes" at the end of the Adhan on a rainy or 
a very cold night during the journey."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 632

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:
Hadith: My father said, "I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) at a place called Al-Abtah. Bilal came and informed him about 
the prayer and then came out with a short spear (or stick) and planted it in front of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) at 
Al-Abtah and pronounced the Iqama."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 633

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:
Hadith: My father said, "I saw Bilal turning his face from side to side while pronouncing the Adhan for the 
prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 634

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
Hadith: My father said, "While we were praying with the Prophet (ﷺ) he heard the noise of some people. After the 
prayer he said, 'What is the matter?' They replied 'We were hurrying for the prayer.' He said, 'Do not 
make haste for the prayer, and whenever you come for the prayer, you should come with calmness, 
and pray whatever you get (with the people) and complete the rest which you have missed."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 635

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When you hear the Iqama, proceed to offer the prayer with calmness and solemnity 
and do not make haste. And pray whatever you are able to pray and complete whatever you have 
missed.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 636

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
Hadith: My father said. "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, 'If the Iqama is pronounced then do not stand for the prayer till 
you see me (in front of you).' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 637

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
Hadith:  My father said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, 'If the Iqama is pronounced, then do not stand for the 
prayer till you see me (in front of you) and do it calmly.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 638

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went out (of the mosque) when the Iqama had been pronounced and the rows 
straightened. The Prophet (ﷺ) stood at his Musalla (praying place) and we waited for the Prophet (ﷺ) to begin 
the prayer with Takbir. He left and asked us to remain in our places. We kept on standing till the 
Prophet returned and the water was trickling from his head for he had taken a bath (of Janaba).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 639

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Once Iqama was pronounced and the people had straightened the rows, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went forward 
(to lead the prayer) but he was Junub, so he said, "Remain in your places." And he went out, took a 
bath and returned with water trickling from his head. Then he led the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 640

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: On the day of Al-Khandaq (the trench), `Umar bin Al-Khattab went to the Prophet (ﷺ) and said, "O 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! By Allah, I could not pray (the `Asr) till the sun had set." `Umar told this to the 
Prophet at the time when a fasting person had done Iftar (taken his meals). The Prophet (ﷺ) then went to 
Buthan and I was with him. He performed ablution and offered the `Asr prayer after the sun had set 
and then the Maghrib prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 641

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Once the Iqama was pronounced and the Prophet (ﷺ) was talking to a man (in a low voice) in a corner of 
the mosque and he did not lead the prayer till (some of) the people had slept (dozed in a sitting 
posture) .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 642

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Once Iqama was pronounced a man came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and detained him (from the prayer).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 643

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is I was about to order for collecting firewood 
(fuel) and then order Someone to pronounce the Adhan for the prayer and then order someone to lead 
the prayer then I would go from behind and burn the houses of men who did not present themselves 
for the (compulsory congregational) prayer. By Him, in Whose Hands my soul is, if anyone of them 
had known that he would get a bone covered with good meat or two (small) pieces of meat present in 
between two ribs, he would have turned up for the `Isha' prayer.'
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 644

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "The prayer in congregation is twenty seven times superior to the prayer offered 
by person alone."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 645

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The prayer in congregation is twenty five times superior to the prayer offered by 
person alone."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 646

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "The reward of the prayer offered by a person in congregation is twenty five 
times greater than that of the prayer offered in one's house or in the market (alone). And this is 
because if he performs ablution and does it perfectly and then proceeds to the mosque with the sole 
intention of praying, then for every step he takes towards the mosque, he is upgraded one degree in 
reward and his one sin is taken off (crossed out) from his accounts (of deeds). When he offers his 
prayer, the angels keep on asking Allah's Blessings and Allah's forgiveness for him as long as he is 
(staying) at his Musalla. They say, 'O Allah! Bestow Your blessings upon him, be Merciful and kind 
to him.' And one is regarded in prayer as long as one is waiting for the prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 647

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Salama bin `Abdur Rahman:
Hadith: Abu Huraira said, "I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, 'The reward of a prayer in congregation is twenty 
five times greater than that of a prayer offered by a person alone. The angels of the night and the 
angels of the day gather at the time of Fajr prayer.' " Abu Huraira then added, "Recite the Holy Book 
if you wish, for "Indeed, the recitation of the Qur'an in the early dawn (Fajr prayer) is ever witnessed." 
(17:78).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 648

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: The reward of the congregational prayer is twenty seven times greater 
(than that of the prayer offered by a person alone).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 649

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salim:
Hadith: I heard Um Ad-Darda' saying, "Abu Ad-Darda' entered the house in an angry mood. I said to him. 
'What makes you angry?' He replied, 'By Allah! I do not find the followers of Muhammad doing those 
good things (which they used to do before) except the offering of congregational prayer." (This 
happened in the last days of Abu Ad-Darda' during the rule of `Uthman) .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 650

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The people who get tremendous reward for the prayer are those who are farthest 
away (from the mosque) and then those who are next farthest and so on. Similarly one who waits to 
pray with the Imam has greater reward than one who prays and goes to bed. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 651

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "While a man was going on a way, he saw a thorny branch and removed it from 
the way and Allah became pleased by his action and forgave him for that." Then the Prophet (ﷺ) said, 
"Five are martyrs: One who dies of plague, one who dies of an Abdominal disease, one who dies of 
drowning, one who is buried alive (and) dies and one who is killed in Allah's cause." (The Prophet (ﷺ) 
further said, "If the people knew the reward for pronouncing the Adhan and for standing in the first 
row (in the congregational prayer) and found no other way to get it except by drawing lots they would 
do so, and if they knew the reward of offering the Zuhr prayer early (in its stated time), they would 
race for it and if they knew the reward for `Isha' and Fajr prayers in congregation, they would attend 
them even if they were to crawl.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 652, 653, 654

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Humaid:
Hadith: Anas said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'O Bani Salima! Don't you think that for every step of yours (that you 
take towards the mosque) there is a reward (while coming for prayer)?" Mujahid said: "Regarding 
Allah's Statement: "We record that which they have sent before (them), and their traces" (36.12). 
'Their traces' means 'their steps.' " And Anas said that the people of Bani Salima wanted to shift to a 
place near the Prophet (ﷺ) but Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) disliked the idea of leaving their houses uninhabited and 
said, "Don't you think that you will get the reward for your footprints." Mujahid said, "Their foot 
prints mean their foot steps and their going on foot."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 655, 656

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "No prayer is heavier upon the hypocrites than the Fajr and the `Isha' prayers and if they knew what is in them (in reward), they would have attended them, even if (it was) crawling.  Certainly, I felt the urge to order the Mu'adh-dhin (call-maker) so that he would pronounce Iqama, then order a man to lead the people (in prayer), then take a flame of fire so that I burn (the houses) upon those who had not left for the prayer yet."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 657

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Malik bin Huwairith:
Hadith: Prophet said (to two persons), "Whenever the prayer time becomes due, you should pronounce Adhan 
and then Iqama and the older of you should lead the prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 658

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "The angels keep on asking for Allah's Blessing and Forgiveness for anyone of 
you as long as he is at his Musalla (praying place) and does not do Hadath (passes wind). The angels 
say, 'O Allah! Forgive him and be Merciful to him.' Each one of you is in the prayer as long as he is 
waiting for the prayer and nothing but the prayer detains him from going to his family."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 659

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Allah will give shade, to seven, on the Day when there will be no shade but His. 
(These seven persons are) a just ruler, a youth who has been brought up in the worship of Allah (i.e. 
worships Allah sincerely from childhood), a man whose heart is attached to the mosques (i.e. to pray 
the compulsory prayers in the mosque in congregation), two persons who love each other only for 
Allah's sake and they meet and part in Allah's cause only, a man who refuses the call of a charming 
woman of noble birth for illicit intercourse with her and says: I am afraid of Allah, a man who gives 
charitable gifts so secretly that his left hand does not know what his right hand has given (i.e. nobody 
knows how much he has given in charity), and a person who remembers Allah in seclusion and his 
eyes are then flooded with tears."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 660

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Humaid:
Hadith: Anas was asked, "Did Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) wear a ring?" He said, "Yes. Once he delayed the `Isha' prayer 
till midnight and after the prayer, he faced us and said, 'The people prayed and have slept and you 
remained in prayer as long as you waited for it.' " Anas added, "As if I were just now observing the 
glitter of his ring."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 661

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Allah will prepare for him who goes to the mosque (every) morning and in the 
afternoon (for the congregational prayer) an honorable place in Paradise with good hospitality for 
(what he has done) every morning and afternoon goings.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 662

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Malik Ibn Buhaina:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) passed by a man praying two rak`at after the Iqama (had been pronounced). When 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) completed the prayer, the people gathered around him (the Prophet) or that man and 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said to him (protesting), Are there four rak`at in Fajr prayer? Are there four rak`at in 
Fajr prayer?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 663

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Aswad:
Hadith: "We were with `Aisha discussing the regularity of offering the prayer and dignifying it. She said, 
'When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) fell sick with the fatal illness and when the time of prayer became due and 
Adhan was pronounced, he said, 'Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.' He was told that Abu 
Bakr was a softhearted man and would not be able to lead the prayer in his place. The Prophet (ﷺ) gave 
the same order again but he was given the same reply. He gave the order for the third time and said, 
'You (women) are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer.' So Abu Bakr came 
out to lead the prayer. In the meantime the condition of the Prophet (ﷺ) improved a bit and he came out 
with the help of two men one on each side. As if I was observing his legs dragging on the ground 
owing to the disease. Abu Bakr wanted to retreat but the Prophet (ﷺ) beckoned him to remain at his place 
and the Prophet (ﷺ) was brought till he sat beside Abu Bakr." Al-A`mash was asked, "Was the Prophet (ﷺ) 
praying and Abu Bakr following him, and were the people following Abu Bakr in that prayer?" Al- 
A`mash replied in the affirmative with a nod of his head. Abu Muawiya said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) was sitting 
on the left side of Abu Bakr who was praying while standing."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 664

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: "When the Prophet (ﷺ) became seriously ill and his disease became aggravated he asked for permission 
from his wives to be nursed in my house and he was allowed. He came out with the help of two men 
and his legs were dragging on the ground. He was between Al-`Abbas and another man." 
'Ubaidullah said, "I told Ibn `Abbas what `Aisha had narrated and he said, 'Do you know who was the 
(second) man whose name `Aisha did not mention'" I said, 'No.' Ibn `Abbas said, 'He was `Ali Ibn Abi 
Talib.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 665

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: Once on a very cold and stormy night, Ibn `Umar pronounced the Adhan for the prayer and then said, 
"Pray in your homes." He (Ibn `Umar) added. "On very cold and rainy nights Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to 
order the Mu'adh-dhin to say, 'Pray in your homes.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 666

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mahmud bin Rabi` Al-Ansari:
Hadith: `Itban bin Malik used to lead his people (tribe) in prayer and was a blind man, he said to Allah's 
Apostle , "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! At times it is dark and flood water is flowing (in the valley) and I am 
blind man, so please pray at a place in my house so that I can take it as a Musalla (praying place)." So 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went to his house and said, "Where do you like me to pray?" 'Itban pointed to a place 
in his house and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), offered the prayer there.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 667

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Al-Harith:
Hadith: Ibn `Abbas addressed us on a (rainy and) muddy day and when the Mu'adh-dhin said, "Come for the 
prayer" Ibn `Abbas ordered him to say, "Pray in your homes." The people began to look at one another 
with surprise as if they did not like it. Ibn `Abbas said, "It seems that you thought ill of it but no doubt 
it was done by one who was better than I (i.e. the Prophet). It (the prayer) is a strict order and I 
disliked to bring you out." 
Ibn `Abbas narrated the same as above but he said, "I did not like you to make you sinful (in 
refraining from coming to the mosque) and to come (to the mosque) covered with mud up to the 
knees."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 668

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: A cloud came and it rained till the roof started leaking and in those days the roof used to be of the 
branches of date-palms. Iqama was pronounced and I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)s prostrating in water and 
mud and even I saw the mark of mud on his forehead.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 669

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Seereen:
Hadith: I heard Anas saying, "A man from Ansar said to the Prophet, 'I cannot pray with you (in 
congregation).' He was a very fat man and he prepared a meal for the Prophet (ﷺ) and invited him to his 
house. He spread out a mat for the Prophet, and washed one of its sides with water, and the Prophet (ﷺ) 
prayed two rak`at on it." A man from the family of Al-Jaruid [??] asked, "Did the Prophet (ﷺ) used to pray 
the Duha (forenoon) prayer?" Anas said, "I did not see him praying the Duha prayer except on that 
day."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 670

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "If supper is served, and Iqama is pronounced one should start with the supper."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 671

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If the supper is served start having it before praying the Maghrib prayer and do 
not be hasty in finishing it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 672

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: Ibn `Umar said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, 'If the supper is served for anyone of you and the Iqama is 
pronounced, start with the supper and don't be in haste (and carry on eating) till you finish it." If food 
was served for Ibn `Umar and Iqama was pronounced, he never came to the prayer till he finished it 
(i.e. food) in spite of the fact that he heard the recitation (of the Qur'an) by the Imam (in the prayer).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 673

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "If anyone of you is having his meals, he should not hurry up 
till he is; satisfied even if the prayer has been started."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 674

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ja`far bin `Amr bin Umaiya:
Hadith: My father said, "I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) eating a piece of meat from the shoulder of a sheep and he was 
called for the prayer. He stood up, put down the knife and prayed but did not perform ablution.''
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 675

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Aswad:
Hadith: That he asked `Aisha "What did the Prophet (ﷺ) use to do in his house?" She replied, "He used to keep 
himself busy serving his family and when it was the time for prayer he would go for it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 676

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aiyub:
Hadith: Abu Qilaba said, "Malik bin Huwairith came to this Mosque of ours and said, 'I pray in front of you 
and my aim is not to lead the prayer but to show you the way in which the Prophet (ﷺ) used to pray.' " I 
asked Abu Qilaba, "How did he use to pray?' " He replied, "(The Prophet (ﷺ) used to pray) like this 
Sheikh of ours and the Sheikh used to sit for a while after the prostration, before getting up after the 
first rak`a. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 677

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Musa:
Hadith: "The Prophet (ﷺ) became sick and when his disease became aggravated, he said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead 
the prayer." `Aisha said, "He is a softhearted man and would not be able to lead the prayer in your 
place." The Prophet (ﷺ) said again, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer." She repeated the same 
reply but he said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer. You are the companions of Joseph." So 
the messenger went to Abu Bakr (with that order) and he led the people in prayer in the lifetime of the 
Prophet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 678

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: the mother of the believers: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) in his illness said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in 
prayer." I said to him, "If Abu Bakr stands in your place, the people would not hear him owing to his 
(excessive) weeping. So please order `Umar to lead the prayer." `Aisha added I said to Hafsa, "Say to 
him: If Abu Bakr should lead the people in the prayer in your place, the people would not be able to 
hear him owing to his weeping; so please, order `Umar to lead the prayer." Hafsa did so but Allah's 
Apostle said, "Keep quiet! You are verily the Companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people 
in the prayer. " Hafsa said to `Aisha, "I never got anything good from you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 679

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
Hadith: Anas bin Malik Al-Ansari, told me, "Abu Bakr used to lead the people in prayer during the fatal 
illness of the Prophet (ﷺ) till it was Monday. When the people aligned (in rows) for the prayer the Prophet (ﷺ) 
lifted the curtain of his house and started looking at us and was standing at that time. His face was 
(glittering) like a page of the Qur'an and he smiled cheerfully. We were about to be put to trial for the 
pleasure of seeing the Prophet, Abu Bakr retreated to join the row as he thought that the Prophet (ﷺ) 
would lead the prayer. The Prophet (ﷺ) beckoned us to complete the prayer and he let the curtain fall. On the same day he died."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 680

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) did not come out for three days. The people stood for the prayer and Abu Bakr went 
ahead to lead the prayer. (In the meantime) the Prophet (ﷺ) caught hold of the curtain and lifted it. When 
the face of the Prophet (ﷺ) appeared we had never seen a scene more pleasing than the face of the Prophet (ﷺ) 
as it appeared then. The Prophet (ﷺ) beckoned to Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer and then let 
the curtain fall. We did not see him (again) till he died.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 681

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hamza bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: My father said, "When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) became seriously ill, he was told about the prayer. He said, 
'Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer.' `Aisha said, 'Abu Bakr is a softhearted man and he 
would be overpowered by his weeping if he recited the Qur'an.' He said to them, 'Tell him (Abu Bakr) 
to lead the prayer. The same reply was given to him. He said again, 'Tell him to lead the prayer. You 
(women) are the companions of Joseph."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 682

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hisham ibn `Urwa's father:
Hadith: `Aisha said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) ordered Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer during his illness and 
so he led them in prayer." `Urwa, a sub narrator, added, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) felt a bit relieved and came 
out and Abu Bakr was leading the people. When Abu Bakr saw the Prophet (ﷺ) he retreated but the 
Prophet beckoned him to remain there. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) sat beside Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr was following 
the prayer of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and the people were following the prayer of Abu Bakr."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 683

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl bin Sa`d As-Sa`idi:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went to establish peace among Bani `Amr bin `Auf. In the meantime the time of 
prayer was due and the Mu'adh-dhin went to Abu Bakr and said, "Will you lead the prayer, so that I 
may pronounce the Iqama?" Abu Bakr replied in the affirmative and led the prayer. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
came while the people were still praying and he entered the rows of the praying people till he stood in 
the (first row). The people clapped their hands. Abu Bakr never glanced sideways in his prayer but 
when the people continued clapping, Abu Bakr looked and saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
beckoned him to stay at his place. Abu Bakr raised his hands and thanked Allah for that order of 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and then he retreated till he reached the first row. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went forward and 
led the prayer. When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) finished the prayer, he said, "O Abu Bakr! What prevented you 
from staying when I ordered you to do so?" 
Abu Bakr replied, "How can Ibn Abi Quhafa (Abu Bakr) dare to lead the prayer in the presence of 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)?" Then Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Why did you clap so much? If something happens to 
anyone during his prayer he should say Subhan Allah. If he says so he will be attended to, for clapping 
is for women."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 684

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Malik bin Huwairith:
Hadith: We went to the Prophet (ﷺ) and we were all young men and stayed with him for about twenty nights. The 
Prophet (ﷺ) was very merciful. He said, "When you return home, impart religious teachings to your 
families and tell them to offer perfectly such and such a prayer at such and such a time and such and 
such a prayer at such and such a time. And at the time of the prayer one of you should pronounce the 
Adhan and the oldest of you should lead the prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 685

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Itban bin Malik Al-Ansari:
Hadith: The Prophet (came to my house and) asked permission for entering and I allowed him. He asked, 
"Where do you like me to pray in your house?" I pointed to a place which I liked. He stood up for 
prayer and we aligned behind him and he finished the prayer with Taslim and we did the same.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 686

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated 'Ubaidullah Ibn `Abdullah bin `Utba:
Hadith: I went to `Aisha and asked her to describe to me the illness of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). `Aisha said, "Yes. The 
Prophet became seriously ill and asked whether the people had prayed. We replied, 'No. O Allah's 
Apostle! They are waiting for you.' He added, 'Put water for me in a trough." `Aisha added, "We did 
so. He took a bath and tried to get up but fainted. When he recovered, he again asked whether the 
people had prayed. We said, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ),' He again said, 'Put 
water in a trough for me.' He sat down and took a bath and tried to get up but fainted again. Then he 
recovered and said, 'Have the people prayed?' We replied, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's 
Apostle.' He said, 'Put water for me in the trough.' Then he sat down and washed himself and tried to 
get up but he fainted. When he recovered, he asked, 'Have the people prayed?' We said, 'No, they are 
waiting for you. O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! The people were in the mosque waiting for the Prophet (ﷺ) for the 
`Isha prayer. The Prophet (ﷺ) sent for Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer. The messenger went to 
Abu Bakr and said, 'Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) orders you to lead the people in the prayer.' Abu Bakr was a 
softhearted man, so he asked `Umar to lead the prayer but `Umar replied, 'You are more rightful.' So 
Abu Bakr led the prayer in those days. When the Prophet (ﷺ) felt a bit better, he came out for the Zuhr 
prayer with the help of two persons one of whom was Al-`Abbas. while Abu Bakr was leading the 
people in the prayer. When Abu Bakr saw him he wanted to retreat but the Prophet (ﷺ) beckoned him not 
to do so and asked them to make him sit beside Abu Bakr and they did so. Abu Bakr was following 
the Prophet (in the prayer) and the people were following Abu Bakr. The Prophet (prayed) sitting." 
'Ubaidullah added "I went to `Abdullah bin `Abbas and asked him, Shall I tell you what Aisha has told 
me about the fatal illness of the Prophet?' Ibn `Abbas said, 'Go ahead. I told him her narration and he 
did not deny anything of it but asked whether `Aisha told me the name of the second person (who 
helped the Prophet (ﷺ) ) along with Al-Abbas. I said. 'No.' He said, 'He was `Ali (Ibn Abi Talib).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 687

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: the mother of the believers: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) during his illness prayed at his house while sitting 
whereas some people prayed behind him standing. The Prophet (ﷺ) beckoned them to sit down. On 
completion of the prayer, he said, 'The Imam is to be followed: bow when he bows, raise up your 
heads (stand erect) when he raises his head and when he says, 'Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah' (Allah 
heard those who sent praises to Him) say then 'Rabbana wa laka l-hamd' (O our Lord! All the praises 
are for You), and if he prays sitting then pray sitting."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 688

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) rode a horse and fell down and the right side (of his body) was injured. He 
offered one of the prayers while sitting and we also prayed behind him sitting. When he completed the 
prayer, he said, "The Imam is to be followed. Pray standing if he prays standing and bow when he 
bows; rise when he rises; and if he says, 'Sami`a l-lahu-liman hamidah, say then, 'Rabbana wa laka lhamd' 
and pray standing if he prays standing and pray sitting (all of you) if he prays sitting." 
Humaid said: The saying of the Prophet (ﷺ) "Pray sitting, if he (Imam) prays sitting" was said in his 
former illness (during his early life) but the Prophet (ﷺ) prayed sitting afterwards (in the last illness) and 
the people were praying standing behind him and the Prophet (ﷺ) did not order them to sit. We should 
follow the latest actions of the Prophet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 689

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara:
Hadith: (and he was not a liar) When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah" none of us bent his 
back (for prostration) till the Prophet (ﷺ) prostrated and then we would prostrate after him.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 690

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu 'Is-haq:
Hadith: As above.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 690b

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Isn't he who raises his head before the Imam afraid that Allah may transform his 
head into that of a donkey or his figure (face) into that of a donkey?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 691

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: When the earliest emigrants came to Al-`Usba [??] a place in Quba', before the arrival of the Prophet- 
Salim, the slave of Abu Hudhaifa, who knew the Qur'an more than the others used to lead them in 
prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 692

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Listen and obey (your chief) even if an Ethiopian whose head is like a raisin were 
made your chief."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 693

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If the Imam leads the prayer correctly then he and you will receive the rewards 
but if he makes a mistake (in the prayer) then you will receive the reward for the prayer and the sin 
will be his."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 694

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated 'Ubaid-Ullah bin Adi bin Khiyar:
Hadith: I went to 'Uthman bin Affan while he was besieged, and said to him, "You are the chief of all Muslims in general and you see what has befallen you. We are led in the Salat (prayer) by a leader of Al-Fitan (trials and afflictions etc.) and we are afraid of being sinful in following him." 'Uthman said. "As-Salat (the prayers) is the best of all deeds so when the people do good deeds do the same with them and when they do bad deeds, avoid those bad deeds." Az-Zuhri said, "In our opinion one should not offer Salat behind an effeminate person unless there is no alternative."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 695

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said to Abu-Dhar, "Listen and obey (your chief) even if he is an Ethiopian with a head 
like a raisin."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 696

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Once I passed the night in the house of my aunt Maimuna. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) offered the `Isha' prayer 
and then came to the house and offered four rak`at an slept. Later on, he woke up and stood for the 
prayer and I stood on his left side. He drew me to his right and prayed five rak`at and then two. He 
then slept till I heard him snoring (or heard his breath sounds). Afterwards he went out for the 
morning prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 697

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: One night I slept at the house of (my aunt) Maimuna and the Prophet (ﷺ) was there on that night. He 
performed ablution and stood up for the prayer. I joined him and stood on his left side but he drew me 
to his right and prayed thirteen rak`at and then slept till I heard his breath sounds. And whenever he 
slept, he used to breathe with audible sounds. The Mu'adh-dhin came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and he went out 
and prayed the morning prayer) without repeating the ablution.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 698

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Once I passed the night in the house of my aunt Maimuna. The Prophet (ﷺ) stood for the night prayer and 
I joined him and stood on his left side but he drew me to his right by holding me by the head.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 699

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mu`adh bin Jabal:
Hadith: I used to pray the `Isha prayer with the Prophet (ﷺ) and then go to lead my people in the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 700

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr:
Hadith: Jabir bin `Abdullah said, "Mu`adh bin Jabal used to pray with the Prophet (ﷺ) and then go to lead his 
people in prayer Once he led the `Isha' prayer and recited Surat "Al-Baqara." Somebody left the 
prayer and Mu`adh criticized him. The news reached the Prophet (ﷺ) and he said to Mu`adh, 'You are 
putting the people to trial,' and repeated it thrice (or said something similar) and ordered him to recite 
two medium Suras of Mufassal." (`Amr said that he had forgotten the names of those Suras).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 701

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Mas`ud:
Hadith: A man came and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! By Allah, I keep away from the morning prayer only 
because So and so prolongs the prayer when he leads us in it." The narrator said, "I never saw Allah's 
Apostle more furious in giving advice than he was at that time. He then said, "Some of you make 
people dislike good deeds (the prayer). So whoever among you leads the people in prayer should 
shorten it because among them are the weak, the old and the needy."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 702

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If anyone of you leads the people in the prayer, he should shorten it for amongst 
them are the weak, the sick and the old; and if anyone among your prays alone then he may prolong 
(the prayer) as much as he wishes. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 703

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Mas`ud:
Hadith: A man came and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I keep away from the morning prayer because so-and-so 
(Imam) prolongs it too much." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) became furious and I had never seen him more furious 
than he was on that day. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "O people! Some of you make others dislike the prayer, so 
whoever becomes an Imam he should shorten the prayer, as behind him are the weak, the old and the 
needy.''
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 704

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah Al-Ansari:
Hadith: Once a man was driving two Nadihas (camels used for agricultural purposes) and night had fallen. He 
found Mu`adh praying so he made his camel kneel and joined Mu`adh in the prayer. The latter recited 
Surat 'Al-Baqara" or Surat "An-Nisa", (so) the man left the prayer and went away. When he came to 
know that Mu`adh had criticized him, he went to the Prophet, and complained against Mu`adh. The 
Prophet said thrice, "O Mu`adh ! Are you putting the people to trial?" It would have been better if you 
had recited "Sabbih Isma Rabbika-l-A`la (87)", Wash-shamsi wa duhaha (91)", or "Wal-laili idha 
yaghsha (92)", for the old, the weak and the needy pray behind you." Jabir said that Mu`adh recited 
Sura Al-Baqara in the `Isha' prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 705

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to pray a short prayer (in congregation) but used to offer it in a perfect manner.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 706

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin 'Abi Qatada:
Hadith: My father said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'When I stand for prayer, I intend to prolong it but on hearing the 
cries of a child, I cut it short, as I dislike to trouble the child's mother.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 707

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: I never prayed behind any Imam a prayer lighter and more perfect than that behind the Prophet (ﷺ) and he 
used to cut short the prayer whenever he heard the cries of a child lest he should put the child's mother 
to trial.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 708

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When I start the prayer I intend to prolong it, but on hearing the cries of a child, I 
cut short the prayer because I know that the cries of the child will incite its mother's passions."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 709

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet, said, "Whenever I start the prayer I intend to prolong it, but on hearing the cries of a 
child, I cut short the prayer because I know that the cries of the child will incite its mother's passions."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 710

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: Mu`adh used to pray with the Prophet (ﷺ) and then go and lead his people (tribe) in the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 711

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: When the Prophet, became ill in his fatal illness, Someone came to inform him about the prayer, and 
the Prophet (ﷺ) told him to tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer. I said, "Abu Bakr is a 
softhearted man and if he stands for the prayer in your place, he would weep and would not be able to 
recite the Qur'an." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer." I said the same as before. He 
(repeated the same order and) on the third or the fourth time he said, "You are the companions of 
Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer." So Abu Bakr led the prayer and meanwhile the Prophet (ﷺ) felt 
better and came out with the help of two men; as if I see him just now dragging his feet on the ground. 
When Abu Bakr saw him, he tried to retreat but the Prophet (ﷺ) beckoned him to carry on. Abu Bakr 
retreated a bit and the Prophet (ﷺ) sat on his (left) side. Abu Bakr was repeating the Takbir (Allahu 
Akbar) of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) for the people to hear.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 712

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) became seriously ill, Bilal came to him for the prayer. He said, "Tell Abu Bakr 
to lead the people in the prayer." I said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Abu Bakr is a softhearted man and if he 
stands in your place, he would not be able to make the people hear him. Will you order `Umar (to lead 
the prayer)?" The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." Then I said to Hafsa, 
"Tell him, Abu i Bakr is a softhearted man and if he stands in his place, he would not be able to make 
the people hear him. Would you order `Umar to lead the prayer?' " Hafsa did so. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 
"Verily you are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." So Abu- 
Bakr stood for the prayer. In the meantime Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) felt better and came out with the help of 
two persons and both of his legs were dragging on the ground till he entered the mosque. When Abu 
Bakr heard him coming, he tried to retreat but Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) beckoned him to carry on. The Prophet (ﷺ) 
sat on his left side. Abu Bakr was praying while standing and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was leading the prayer 
while sitting. Abu Bakr was following the Prophet (ﷺ) and the people were following Abu Bakr (in the 
prayer).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 713

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) prayed two rak`at (instead of four) and finished his prayer. Dhul-Yadain asked 
him whether the prayer had been reduced or whether he had forgotten. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) asked the 
people whether Dhul-Yadain was telling the truth. The people replied in the affirmative. Then Allah's 
Apostle stood up, offered the remaining two rak`at and then finished his prayer with Taslim and then 
said, "Allahu Akbar." He followed it with two prostrations like ordinary prostrations or a bit longer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 714

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed two rak`at of Zuhr prayer (instead of four) and he was told that he had prayed two 
rak`at only. Then he prayed two more rak`at and finished them with the Taslim followed by two 
prostrations.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 715

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: the mother of the faithful believers: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) in his last illness said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the 
people in the prayer." I said, "If Abu Bakr stood in your place, he would not be able to make the 
people hear him owing to his weeping. So please order `Umar to lead the prayer." He said, "Tell Abu 
Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." I said to Hafsa, "Say to him, 'Abu Bakr is a softhearted man and 
if he stood in your place he would not be able to make the people hear him owing to his weeping. So 
order `Umar to lead the people in the prayer.' " Hafsa did so but Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Keep quiet. 
Verily you are the companions of (Prophet) Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." 
Hafsa said to me, "I never got any good from you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 716

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated An-Nu`man bin 'Bashir:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Straighten your rows or Allah will alter your faces."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 717

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Straighten your rows, for I see you from behind my back.'
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 718

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Once the Iqama was pronounced and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) faced us and said, "Straighten your rows and 
stand closer together, for I see you from behind my back.'
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 719

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Martyrs are those who die because of drowning, plague, an Abdominal disease, or 
of being buried alive by a falling building." And then he added, "If the people knew the Reward for 
the Zuhr prayer in its early time, they would race for it. If they knew the reward for the `Isha' and the 
Fajr prayers in congregation, they would join them even if they had to crawl. If they knew the reward 
for the first row, they would draw lots for it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 720, 721

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The Imam is (appointed) to be followed. So do not differ from him, bow when he 
bows, and say, "Rabbana-lakal hamd" if he says "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah"; and if he prostrates, 
prostrate (after him), and if he prays sitting, pray sitting all together, and straighten the rows for the 
prayer, as the straightening of the rows is amongst those things which make your prayer a correct and 
perfect one. (See Hadith No. 657).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 722

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Straighten your rows as the straightening of rows is essential for a perfect and 
correct prayer. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 723

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: I arrived at Medina and was asked whether I found any change since the days of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). I 
said, "I have not found any change except that you do not stand in alignment in your prayers."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 724

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Straighten your rows for I see you from behind my back." Anas added, "Everyone 
of us used to put his shoulder with the shoulder of his companion and his foot with the foot of his 
companion."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 725

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: I prayed with the Prophet (ﷺ) one night and stood on his left side. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) caught hold of my head 
from behind and drew me to his right and then offered the prayer and slept. Later the Mu'adh-dhin 
came and the Prophet (ﷺ) stood up for prayer without performing ablution.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 726

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: One night an orphan and I offered the prayers behind the Prophet (ﷺ) in my house and my mother (Um 
Sulaim) was standing behind us (by herself forming a row).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 727

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: One night I stood to the left of the Prophet (ﷺ) in the prayer but he caught hold of me by the hand or by 
the shoulder (arm) till he made me stand on his right and beckoned with his hand (for me) to go from 
behind (him). (Al-Kashmaihani [??] , Fath-ul-Bari).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 728

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to pray in his room at night. As the wall of the room was LOW, the people saw 
him and some of them stood up to follow him in the prayer. In the morning they spread the news. The 
following night the Prophet (ﷺ) stood for the prayer and the people followed him. This went on for two or 
three nights. Thereupon Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) did not stand for the prayer the following night, and did not 
come out. In the morning, the people asked him about it. He replied, that he way afraid that the night 
prayer might become compulsory.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 729

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) had a mat which he used to spread during the day and use as a curtain at night. So a 
number of people gathered at night facing it and prayed behind him.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 730

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) made a small room in the month of Ramadan (Sa`id said, "I think that Zaid bin Thabit 
said that it was made of a mat") and he prayed there for a few nights, and so some of his companions 
prayed behind him. When he came to know about it, he kept on sitting. In the morning, he went out to 
them and said, "I have seen and understood what you did. You should pray in your houses, for the best 
prayer of a person is that which he prays in his house except the compulsory prayers."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 731

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik Al-Ansari:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) rode a horse and fell down and the right side of his body was injured. On that day he 
prayed one of the prayers sitting and we also prayed behind him sitting. When the Prophet (ﷺ) finished the 
prayer with Taslim, he said, "The Imam is to be followed and if he prays standing then pray standing, 
and bow when he bows, and raise your heads when he raises his head; prostrate when he prostrates; 
and if he says "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah", you should say, "Rabbana wa laka l-hamd.:
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 732

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) fell from a horse and got injured so he led the prayer sitting and we also prayed 
sitting. When he completed the prayer he said, "The Imam is to be followed; if he says Takbir then say 
Takbir, bow if he bows; raise your heads when he raises his head, when he says, 'Sami`a l-lahu liman 
hamidah say, 'Rabbana laka l-hamd', and prostrate when he prostrates."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 733

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The Imam is to be followed. Say the Takbir when he says it; bow if he bows; if he 
says 'Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah', say, ' Rabbana wa laka l-hamd', prostrate if he prostrates and pray 
sitting altogether if he prays sitting."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 734

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salim bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: My father said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to raise both his hands up to the level of his shoulders when 
opening the prayer; and on saying the Takbir for bowing. And on raising his head from bowing he 
used to do the same and then say "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah, Rabbana wa laka l-hamd." And he 
did not do that (i.e. raising his hands) in prostrations.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 735

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: I saw that whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stood for the prayer, he used to raise both his hands up to the 
shoulders, and used to do the same on saying the Takbir for bowing and on raising his head from it 
and used to say, "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah". But he did not do that (i.e. raising his hands) in 
prostrations.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 736

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
Hadith: I saw Malik bin Huwairith saying Takbir and raising both his hands (on starting the prayers and 
raising his hands on bowing and also on raising his head after bowing. Malik bin Huwairith said, 
"Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) did the same."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 737

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) opening the prayer with the Takbir and raising his hands to the level of his 
shoulders at the time of saying the Takbir, and on saying the Takbir for bowing he did the same; and 
when he said, "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah ", he did the same and then said, "Rabbana wa laka lhamd." 
But he did not do the same on prostrating and on lifting the head from it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 738

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: Whenever Ibn `Umar started the prayer with Takbir, he used to raise his hands: whenever he bowed, 
he used to raise his hands (before bowing) and also used to raise his hands on saying, "Sami`a l-lahu 
liman hamidah", and he used to do the same on rising from the second rak`a (for the 3rd rak`a). Ibn 
`Umar said: "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to do the same."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 739

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl bin Sa`d:
Hadith: The people were ordered to place the right hand on the left forearm in the prayer. Abu Hazim said, "I 
knew that the order was from the Prophet (ﷺ) ."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 740

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "You see me facing the Qibla; but, by Allah, nothing is hidden from me 
regarding your bowing and submissiveness and I see you from behind my back."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 741

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Perform the bowing and the prostrations properly. By Allah, I see you from behind 
me (or from behind my back) when you bow or prostrate."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 742

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet, Abu Bakr and `Umar used to start the prayer with "Al hamdu li l-lahi Rabbi l-`alamin 
(All praise is but to Allah, Lord of the Worlds).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 743

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to keep silent between the Takbir and the recitation of Qur'an and that interval of 
silence used to be a short one. I said to the Prophet (ﷺ) "May my parents be sacrificed for you! What do 
you say in the pause between Takbir and recitation?" The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I say, 'Allahumma, baa`id 
baini wa baina khatayaya kama baa`adta baina l-mashriqi wa l-maghrib. Allahumma, naqqini min 
khatayaya kama yunaqqa th-thawbu l-abyadu mina d-danas. Allahumma, ighsil khatayaya bi l-maa'i 
wa th-thalji wa l-barad (O Allah! Set me apart from my sins (faults) as the East and West are set apart 
from each other and clean me from sins as a white garment is cleaned of dirt (after thorough washing). 
O Allah! Wash off my sins with water, snow and hail.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 744

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) once offered the eclipse prayer. He stood for a long time and then did a prolonged 
bowing. He stood up straight again and kept on standing for a long time, then bowed a long bowing 
and then stood up straight and then prostrated a prolonged prostration and then lifted his head and 
prostrated a prolonged prostration. And then he stood up for a long time and then did a prolonged 
bowing and then stood up straight again and kept on standing for a long time. Then he bowed a long 
bowing and then stood up straight and then prostrated a prolonged prostration and then lifted his head 
and went for a prolonged prostration. On completion o the prayer, he said, "Paradise became s near to 
me that if I had dared, I would have plucked one of its bunches for you and Hell became so near to me 
that said, 'O my Lord will I be among those people?' Then suddenly I saw a woman and a cat was 
lacerating her with it claws. On inquiring, it was said that the woman had imprisoned the cat till it died 
of starvation and she neither fed it no freed it so that it could feed itself."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 745

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Ma`mar:
Hadith: We asked Khabbab whether Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to recite (the Qur'an) in the Zuhr and the `Asr 
prayers. He replied in the affirmative. We said, "How did you come to know about it?" He said, "By 
the movement of his beard."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 746

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara:
Hadith: (And Al-Bara was not a liar) Whenever we offered prayer with the Prophet (ﷺ) and he raised his head 
from the bowing, we used to remain standing till we saw him prostrating .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 747

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Abbas:
Hadith: Once solar eclipse occurred during the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). He offered the eclipse prayer. His 
companions asked, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! We saw you trying to take something while standing at your 
place and then we saw you retreating." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I was shown Paradise and wanted to have a 
bunch of fruit from it. Had I taken it, you would have eaten from it as long as the world remains."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 748

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) led us in prayer and then went up to the pulpit and beckoned with both hands towards the 
Qibla of the mosque and then said, "When I started leading you in prayer, I saw the display of 
Paradise and Hell on the wall of the mosque (facing the Qibla). I never saw good and bad as I have 
seen today." He repeated the last statement thrice.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 749

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "What is wrong with those people who look towards the sky during the prayer?" His 
talk grew stern while delivering this speech and he said, "They should stop (looking towards the sky 
during the prayer); otherwise their eyesight would be taken away."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 750

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: I asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) about looking hither and thither in prayer. He replied, "It is a way of stealing 
by which Satan takes away (a portion) from the prayer of a person."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 751

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) prayed on a Khamisa with marks on it and said, "The marks on it diverted my 
attention, take this Khamisa to Abu Jahm and bring an Inbijaniya (from him.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 752

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) saw expectoration in the direction of the Qibla of the mosque while he was leading the 
prayer, and scratched it off. After finishing the prayer, he said, "Whenever any of you is in prayer he 
should know that Allah is in front of him. So none should spit in front of him in the prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 753

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: While the Muslims were offering the Fajr prayer, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) suddenly appeared before them by 
living the curtain of the dwelling place of `Aisha, looked towards the Muslims who were standing in 
rows. He smiled with pleasure. Abu Bakr started retreating to join the row on the assumption that the 
Prophet wanted to come out for the prayer. The Muslims intended to leave the prayer (and were on the 
verge of being put to trial), but the Prophet (ﷺ) beckoned them to complete their prayer and then he let the 
curtain fall. He died in the last hours of that day.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 754

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
Hadith: The People of Kufa complained against Sa`d to `Umar and the latter dismissed him and appointed 
`Ammar as their chief . They lodged many complaints against Sa`d and even they alleged that he did 
not pray properly. `Umar sent for him and said, "O Aba 'Is-haq! These people claim that you do not 
pray properly." Abu 'Is-haq said, "By Allah, I used to pray with them a prayer similar to that of Allah's 
Apostle and I never reduced anything of it. I used to prolong the first two rak`at of `Isha prayer and 
shorten the last two rak`at." `Umar said, "O Aba 'Is-haq, this was what I thought about you." And then 
he sent one or more persons with him to Kufa so as to ask the people about him. So they went there 
and did not leave any mosque without asking about him. All the people praised him till they came to 
the mosque of the tribe of Bani `Abs; one of the men called Usama bin Qatada with a surname of Aba 
Sa`da stood up and said, "As you have put us under an oath; I am bound to tell you that Sa`d never 
went himself with the army and never distributed (the war booty) equally and never did justice in legal 
verdicts." (On hearing it) Sa`d said, "I pray to Allah for three things: O Allah! If this slave of yours is 
a liar and got up for showing off, give him a long life, increase his poverty and put him to trials." (And 
so it happened). Later on when that person was asked how he was, he used to reply that he was an old 
man in trial as the result of Sa`d's curse. `Abdul Malik, the sub narrator, said that he had seen him 
afterwards and his eyebrows were overhanging his eyes owing to old age and he used to tease and 
assault the small girls in the way.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 755

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whoever does not recite Al-Fatiha in his prayer, his prayer is invalid."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 756

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) entered the mosque and a person followed him. The man prayed and went to the 
Prophet and greeted him. The Prophet (ﷺ) returned the greeting and said to him, "Go back and pray, for 
you have not prayed." The man went back prayed in the same way as before, returned and greeted the 
Prophet who said, "Go back and pray, for you have not prayed." This happened thrice. The man said, 
"By Him Who sent you with the Truth, I cannot offer the prayer in a better way than this. Please, 
teach me how to pray." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When you stand for Prayer say Takbir and then recite from 
the Holy Qur'an (of what you know by heart) and then bow till you feel at ease. Then raise your head 
and stand up straight, then prostrate till you feel at ease during your prostration, then sit with calmness 
till you feel at ease (do not hurry) and do the same in all your prayers.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 757

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
Hadith: Sa`d said, "I used to pray with them a prayer similar to that of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (the prayer of Zuhr and 
`Asr) reducing nothing from them. I used to prolong the first two rak`at and shorten the last two 
rak`at." `Umar said to Sa`d "This was what we thought about you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 758

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
Hadith: My father said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) in Zuhr prayers used to recite Al-Fatiha along with two other Suras in 
the first two rak`at: a long one in the first rak`a and a shorter (Sura) in the second, and at times the 
verses were audible. In the `Asr prayer the Prophet (ﷺ) used to recite Al-Fatiha and two more Suras in the 
first two rak`at and used to prolong the first rak`a. And he used to prolong the first rak`a of the Fajr 
prayer and shorten the second.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 759

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Ma`mar:
Hadith: I asked Khabbab whether the Prophet (ﷺ) used to recite the Qur'an in the Zuhr and the `Asr prayers. He 
replied in the affirmative. We said, "How did you come to know that?" He said, "From the movement 
of his beard."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 760

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Ma`mar:
Hadith: I asked Khabbab bin Al-Art whether the Prophet (ﷺ) used to recite the Qur'an in the Zuhr and the `Asr 
prayers. He replied in the affirmative. I said, "How did you come to know that?" He replied, "From 
the movement of his beard."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 761

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
Hadith: My father said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to recite Al-Fatiha along with another Sura in the first two rak`at of 
the Zuhr and the `Asr prayers and at times a verse or so was audible to us."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 762

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: (My mother) Umu-l-Fadl heard me reciting "Wal Mursalati `Urfan" (77) and said, "O my son! By 
Allah, your recitation made me remember that it was the last Sura I heard from Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). He 
recited it in the Maghrib prayer. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 763

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam:
Hadith: Zaid bin Thabit said to me, "Why do you recite very short Suras in the Maghrib prayer while I heard 
the Prophet (ﷺ) reciting the longer of the two long Suras?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 764

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jubair bin Mut`im:
Hadith: My father said, "I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) reciting "at-Tur" (52) in the Maghrib prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 765

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Rafi`:
Hadith: I offered the `Isha' prayer behind Abu Huraira and he recited, "Idha s-samaa'u n-shaqqat" (84) and 
prostrated. On my inquiring, he said, "I prostrated behind Abul-Qasim (the Prophet) (when he recited 
that Sura) and I will go on doing it till I meet him."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 766

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) was on a journey and recited in one of the first two rak`at of the `Isha' prayer "Wa t-teeni 
wa z-zaitun." (95)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 767

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Rafi`:
Hadith: Once I prayed the `Isha' prayer with Abu Huraira and he recited, "Idha s-samaa'u n-shaqqat" (84) and 
prostrated. I said, "What is that?" He said, "I prostrated behind Abul-Qasim, (the Prophet) (when he 
recited that Sura) and I will go on doing it till I meet him."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 768

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara:
Hadith: I heard the Prophet (ﷺ) reciting wa t-teeni wa z-zaitun" (95) in the `Isha' prayer, and I never heard a 
sweeter voice or a better way of recitation than that of the Prophet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 769

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
Hadith: `Umar said to Sa`d, "The people complained against you in everything, even in prayer." Sa`d replied, 
"Really I used to prolong the first two rak`at and shorten the last two and I will never shorten the 
prayer in which I follow Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)." `Umar said, "You are telling the truth and that is what I 
think a tout you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 770

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Saiyar bin Salama:
Hadith: My father and I went to Abu Barza-al-Aslami to ask him about the stated times for the prayers. He 
replied, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer the Zuhr prayer when the sun just declined from its highest 
position at noon; the `Asr at a time when if a man went to the farthest place in Medina (after praying) 
he would find the sun still hot (bright). (The sub narrator said: I have forgotten what Abu Barza said 
about the Maghrib prayer). The Prophet (ﷺ) never found any harm in delaying the `Isha' prayer to the first 
third of the night and he never liked to sleep before it and to talk after it. He used to offer the morning 
prayer at a time when after finishing it one could recognize the person sitting beside him and used to 
recite between 60 to 100 verses in one or both the rak`at."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 771

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Qur'an is recited in every prayer and in those prayers in which Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) recited aloud for 
us, we recite aloud in the same prayers for you; and the prayers in which the Prophet (ﷺ) recited quietly, 
we recite quietly. If you recite "Al-Fatiha" only it is sufficient but if you recite something else in 
addition, it is better.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 772

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) set out with the intention of going to Suq `Ukaz (market of `Ukaz) along with some of his 
companions. At the same time, a barrier was put between the devils and the news of heaven. Fire 
commenced to be thrown at them. The Devils went to their people, who asked them, "What is wrong 
with you?" They said, "A barrier has been placed between us and the news of heaven. And fire has 
been thrown at us." They said, "The thing which has put a barrier between you and the news of heaven 
must be something which has happened recently. Go eastward and westward and see what has put a 
barrier between you and the news of heaven." Those who went towards Tuhama came across the 
Prophet at a place called Nakhla and it was on the way to Suq `Ukaz and the Prophet (ﷺ) was offering the 
Fajr prayer with his companions. When they heard the Qur'an they listened to it and said, "By Allah, 
this is the thing which has put a barrier between us and the news of heaven." They went to their people 
and said, "O our people; verily we have heard a wonderful recital (Qur'an) which shows the true path; 
we believed in it and would not ascribe partners to our Lord." Allah revealed the following verses to 
his Prophet (Sura 'Jinn') (72): "Say: It has been revealed to me." And what was revealed to him was 
the conversation of the Jinns.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 773

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) recited aloud in the prayers in which he was ordered to do so and quietly in the prayers in 
which he was ordered to do so. "And your Lord is not forgetful." "Verily there was a good example 
for you in the ways of the Prophet."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 774

Hadith Narrated by: Anas said:
Hadith: One of the Ansar used to lead the Ansar in Salat in the Quba' mosque and it was his habit to recite Qul Huwal-lahu Ahad whenever he wanted to recite something in Salat. When he finished that Surah, he would recite another one with it. He followed the same procedure in each Rak'a. His companions discussed this with him and said, "You recite this Surah and do not consider it sufficient and then you recite another. So would you recite it alone or leave it and recite some other." He said, "I will never leave it and if you want me to be your Imam on this condition then it is all right ; otherwise I will leave you." They knew that he was the best amongst them and they did not like someone else to lead them in Salat. When the Prophet (ﷺ) went to them as usual, they informed him about it. The Prophet (ﷺ) addressed him and said, "O so-and-so, what forbids you from doing what your companions ask you to do ? Why do you read this Surah particularly in every Rak'a ?" He repiled, "I love this Surah." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Your love for this Surah will make you enter Paradise."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 774b

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Wa'il:
Hadith: A man came to Ibn Mas`ud and said, "I recited the Mufassal (Suras) at night in one rak`a." Ibn 
Mas`ud said, "This recitation is (too quick) like the recitation of poetry. I know the identical Suras 
which the Prophet (ﷺ) used to recite in pairs." Ibn Mas`ud then mentioned 20 Mufassal Suras including 
two Suras from the family of (i.e. those verses which begin with) Ha, Meem [??] (which the Prophet (ﷺ) 
used to recite) in each rak`a.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 775

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
Hadith: My father said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) uses to recite Al-Fatiha followed by another Sura in the first two rak`at 
of the prayer and used to recite only Al-Fatiha in the last two rak`at of the Zuhr prayer. Sometimes a 
verse or so was audible and he used to prolong the first rak`a more than the second and used to do the 
same in the `Asr and Fajr prayers."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 776

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Ma`mar:
Hadith: We said to Khabbab "Did Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to recite in Zuhr and `Asr prayers?" He replied in the 
affirmative. We said, "How did you come to know about it?" He said, "By the movement of his 
beard."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 777

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
Hadith: My father said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to recite Al-Fatiha along with another Sura in the first two rak`at of 
the Zuhr and `Asr prayers. A verse or so was audible at times and he used to prolong the first rak`a."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 778

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
Hadith: My father said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to prolong the first rak`a of the Zuhr prayer and shorten the second 
one and used to do the same in the Fajr prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 779

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Say Amin" when the Imam says it and if the Amin of any one of you coincides 
with that of the angels then all his past sins will be forgiven." Ibn Shihab said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used 
to Say "Amin."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 780

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If any one of you says, "Amin" and the angels in the heavens say "Amin" and 
the former coincides with the latter, all his past sins will be forgiven."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 781

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Say Amen when the Imam says 'Ghairi l-maghdubi `alaihim wala d-daalleen' 
(not the path of those who earn Your Anger (such as Jews) nor of those who go astray (such as 
Christians)); all the past sins of the person whose saying (of Amin) coincides with that of the angels, 
will be forgiven".
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 782

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Bakra:
Hadith: I reached the Prophet (ﷺ) in the mosque while he was bowing in prayer and I too bowed before joining the 
row mentioned it to the Prophet (ﷺ) and he said to me, "May Allah increase your love for the good. But do 
not repeat it again (bowing in that way).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 783

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Imran bin Husain:
Hadith: I offered the prayer with `Ali in Basra and he made us remember the prayer which we used to pray 
with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). `Ali said Takbir on each rising and bowing.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 784

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Salama:
Hadith: When Abu Huraira led us in prayer he used to say Takbir on each bowing and rising. On the 
completion of the prayer he used to say, "My prayer is more similar to the prayer of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
than that of anyone of you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 785

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mutarrif bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: `Imran bin Husain and I offered the prayer behind `Ali bin Abi Talib. When `Ali prostrated, he said 
the Takbir, when he raised his head, he said the Takbir and when he got up for the third rak`a he said 
the Takbir. On completion of the prayer `Imran took my hand and said, "This (i.e. `Ali) made me 
remember the prayer of Muhammad" Or he said, "He led us in a prayer like that of Muhammad."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 786

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ikrima:
Hadith: I saw a person praying at Muqam-Ibrahim (the place of Abraham by the Ka`ba) and he was saying 
Takbir on every bowing, rising, standing and sitting. I asked Ibn `Abbas (about this prayer). He 
admonished me saying: "Isn't that the prayer of the Prophet?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 787

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ikrima:
Hadith: I prayed behind a Sheikh at Mecca and he said twenty two Takbirs (during the prayer). I told Ibn 
`Abbas that he (i.e. that Sheikh) was foolish. Ibn `Abbas admonished me and said, "This is the 
tradition of Abul-Qasim."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 788

Hadith Narrated by: And narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stood for the prayer, 
he said Takbir on starting the prayer and then on bowing. On rising from bowing he said, "Sami`a llahu 
liman hamidah," and then while standing straight he used to say, "Rabbana laka-l hamd" (Al- 
Laith said, "(The Prophet (ﷺ) said), 'Wa laka l-hamd'." He used to say Takbir on prostrating and on raising 
his head from prostration; again he would Say Takbir on prostrating and raising his head. He would 
then do the same in the whole of the prayer till it was completed. On rising from the second rak`a 
(after sitting for at-Tahiyyat), he used to say Takbir.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 789

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mus`ab bin Sa`d:
Hadith: I offered prayer beside my father and approximated both my hands and placed them in between the 
knees. My father told me not to do so and said, "We used to do the same but we were forbidden (by 
the Prophet) to do it and were ordered to place the hands on the knees."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 790

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Zaid bin Wahb:
Hadith: Hudhaifa saw a person who was not performing the bowing and prostration perfectly. He said to him, 
"You have not prayed and if you should die you would die on a religion other than that of 
Muhammad."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 791

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara:
Hadith: The bowing, the prostration the sitting in between the two prostrations and the standing after the 
bowing of the Prophet (ﷺ) but not qiyam (standing in the prayer) and qu`ud (sitting in the prayer) used to 
be approximately equal (in duration).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 792

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) entered the mosque, a man came in, offered the prayer and greeted the Prophet. The 
Prophet returned his greeting and said to him, "Go back and pray again for you have not prayed." The 
man offered the prayer again, came back and greeted the Prophet. He said to him thrice, "Go back and 
pray again for you have not prayed." The man said, "By Him Who has sent you with the truth! I do 
not know a better way of praying. Kindly teach Me how to pray." He said, "When you stand for the 
prayer, say Takbir and then recite from the Qur'an what you know and then bow with calmness till 
you feel at ease, then rise from bowing till you stand straight. Afterwards prostrate calmly till you feel 
at ease and then raise (your head) and sit with Calmness till you feel at ease and then prostrate with 
calmness till you feel at ease in prostration and do the same in the whole of your prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 793

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to say in his bowing and prostrations, "Subhanaka l-lahumma Rabbana wa 
bihamdika; Allahumma ghfir li.' (Exalted [from unbecoming attributes] Are you O Allah our Lord, 
and by Your praise [do I exalt you]. O Allah! Forgive me).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 794

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: When the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah," (Allah heard those who sent praises to Him), 
he would say, "Rabbana wa laka l-hamd." On bowing and raising his head from it the Prophet (ﷺ) used to 
say Takbir. He also used to say Takbir on rising after the two prostrations. (See Hadith No. 656).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 795

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "When the Imam says, "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah," you should say, 
"Allahumma Rabbana laka l-hamd." And if the saying of any one of you coincides with that of the 
angels, all his past sins will be forgiven."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 796

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Abu Salama:
Hadith: Abu Hurairah said, "No doubt, my Salat is similar to that of the Prophet (ﷺ)." Abu Hurairah used to recite Qunut after saying Sami' Allahu liman hamida in the last Rak'a of the Zuhr, Isha and Fajr Prayers. He would ask Allah's Forgiveness for the true believers and curse the disbelievers.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 797

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The qunut [supplication before going down for prostration] used to be recited in the Maghrib and the 
Fajr prayers.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 798

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Rifa`a bin Rafi` Az-Zuraqi:
Hadith: One day we were praying behind the Prophet. When he raised his head from bowing, he said, "Sami`a 
l-lahu liman hamidah." A man behind him said, "Rabbana wa laka l-hamdu, hamdan kathiran taiyiban 
mubarakan fihi" (O our Lord! All the praises are for You, many good and blessed praises). When the 
Prophet completed the prayer, he asked, "Who has said these words?" The man replied, "I." The 
Prophet said, "I saw over thirty angels competing to write it first." Prophet rose (from bowing) and 
stood straight till all the vertebrae of his spinal column came to a natural position.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 799

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Thabit:
Hadith: Anas used to demonstrate to us the prayer of the Prophet (ﷺ) and while demonstrating, he used to raise his 
head from bowing and stand so long that we would say that he had forgotten (the prostration).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 800

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara':
Hadith: The bowing, the prostrations, the period of standing after bowing and the interval between the two 
prostrations of the Prophet (ﷺ) used to be equal in duration .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 801

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aiyub:
Hadith: Abu Qilaba said, "Malik bin Huwairith used to demonstrate to us the prayer of the Prophet (ﷺ) at times 
other than that of the compulsory prayers. So (once) he stood up for prayer and performed a perfect 
Qiyam (standing and reciting from the Holy Qur'an) and then bowed and performed bowing perfectly; 
then he raised his head and stood straight for a while." Abu Qilaba added, "Malik bin Huwairith in 
that demonstration prayed like this Sheikh of ours, Abu Yazid." Abu, Yazid used to sit (for a while) 
on raising his head from the second prostration before getting up.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 802

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Bakr bin `Abdur Rahman Ibn Harith bin Hisham and Abu Salama bin `Abdur Rahman:
Hadith: Abu Huraira used to say Takbir in all the prayers, compulsory and optional -- in the month of 
Ramadan or other months. He used to say Takbir on standing for prayer and on bowing; then he 
would say, "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah," and before prostrating he would say "Rabbana wa laka lhamd." 
Then he would say Takbir on prostrating and on raising his head from the prostration, then 
another Takbir on prostrating (for the second time), and on raising his head from the prostration. He 
also would say the Takbir on standing from the second rak`a. He used to do the same in every rak`a 
till he completed the prayer. On completion of the prayer, he would say, "By Him in Whose Hands my 
soul is! No doubt my prayer is closer to that of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) than yours, and this was His prayer till 
he left this world."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 803

Hadith Narrated by: And Abu Huraira said, "When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) raised his head from (bowing) he 
used to say "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah, Rabbana wa laka l-hamd." He Would invoke Allah for 
some people by naming them:
Hadith: "O Allah! Save Al-Walid bin Al-Walid and Salama bin Hisham and 
`Aiyash bin Abi Rabi`a and the weak and the helpless people among the faithful believers O Allah! Be 
hard on the tribe of Mudar and let them suffer from famine years like that of the time of Joseph." In 
those days the Eastern section of the tribe of Mudar was against the Prophet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 804

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) fell from a horse and the right side of his body was injured. We went to inquire about 
his health meanwhile it was time for the prayer and he led the prayer sitting and we also prayed while 
sitting. On completion of the prayer he said, "The Imam is to be followed; say Takbir when he says it; 
bow when he bows; rise when he rises and when he says "Sami`a l-lahu liman hamidah," say, 
"Rabbana wa laka l-hamd", and prostrate if he prostrates." Sufyan narrated the same from Ma`mar. 
Ibn Juraij said that his (the Prophet's) right leg had been injured.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 805

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The people said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Shall we see our Lord on the Day of Resurrection?" He replied, 
"Do you have any doubt in seeing the full moon on a clear (not cloudy) night?" They replied, "No, O 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)!" He said, "Do you have any doubt in seeing the sun when there are no clouds?" They 
replied in the negative. He said, "You will see Allah (your Lord) in the same way. On the Day of 
Resurrection, people will be gathered and He will order the people to follow what they used to 
worship. So some of them will follow the sun, some will follow the moon, and some will follow other 
deities; and only this nation (Muslims) will be left with its hypocrites. Allah will come to them and 
say, 'I am Your Lord.' They will say, 'We shall stay in this place till our Lord comes to us and when 
our Lord will come, we will recognize Him. Then Allah will come to them again and say, 'I am your 
Lord.' They will say, 'You are our Lord.' Allah will call them, and As-Sirat (a bridge) will be laid 
across Hell and I (Muhammad) shall be the first amongst the Apostles to cross it with my followers. 
Nobody except the Apostles will then be able to speak and they will be saying then, 'O Allah! Save us. 
O Allah Save us.' 
There will be hooks like the thorns of Sa'dan [??] in Hell. Have you seen the thorns of Sa'dan [??]?" 
The people said, "Yes." He said, "These hooks will be like the thorns of Sa'dan [??] but nobody except 
Allah knows their greatness in size and these will entangle the people according to their deeds; some 
of them will fall and stay in Hell forever; others will receive punishment (torn into small pieces) and 
will get out of Hell, till when Allah intends mercy on whomever He likes amongst the people of Hell, 
He will order the angels to take out of Hell those who worshipped none but Him alone. The angels 
will take them out by recognizing them from the traces of prostrations, for Allah has forbidden the 
(Hell) fire to eat away those traces. So they will come out of the Fire, it will eat away from the whole 
of the human body except the marks of the prostrations. At that time they will come out of the Fire as 
mere skeletons. The Water of Life will be poured on them and as a result they will grow like the seeds 
growing on the bank of flowing water. 
Then when Allah had finished from the Judgments amongst his creations, one man will be left 
between Hell and Paradise and he will be the last man from the people of Hell to enter paradise. He 
will be facing Hell, and will say, 'O Allah! Turn my face from the fire as its wind has dried me and its 
steam has burnt me.' Allah will ask him, "Will you ask for anything more in case this favor is granted 
to you?' He will say, "No by Your (Honor) Power!" And he will give to his Lord (Allah) what he will 
of the pledges and the covenants. Allah will then turn his face from the Fire. When he will face 
Paradise and will see its charm, he will remain quiet as long as Allah will. He then will say, 'O my 
Lord! Let me go to the gate of Paradise.' Allah will ask him, 'Didn't you give pledges and make 
covenants (to the effect) that you would not ask for anything more than what you requested at first?' 
He will say, 'O my Lord! Do not make me the most wretched, amongst Your creatures.' Allah will say, 
'If this request is granted, will you then ask for anything else?' He will say, 'No! By Your Power! I 
shall not ask for anything else.' Then he will give to his Lord what He will of the pledges and the 
covenants. 
Allah will then let him go to the gate of Paradise. On reaching then and seeing its life, charm, and 
pleasure, he will remain quiet as long as Allah wills and then will say, 'O my Lord ! Let me enter 
Paradise.' Allah will say, May Allah be merciful unto you, O son of Adam! How treacherous you are! 
Haven't you made covenants and given pledges that you will not ask for anything more that what you 
have been given?' He will say, 'O my Lord! Do not make me the most wretched amongst Your 
creatures.' So Allah will laugh and allow him to enter Paradise and will ask him to request as much as 
he likes. He will do so till all his desires have been fulfilled . Then Allah will say, 'Request more of 
such and such things.' Allah will remind him and when all his desires and wishes; have been fulfilled, 
Allah will say "All this is granted to you and a similar amount besides." Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri, said to 
Abu Huraira, 'Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Allah said, 'That is for you and ten times more like it.' "Abu 
Huraira said, "I do not remember from Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) except (his saying), 'All this is granted to you 
and a similar amount besides." Abu Sa`id said, "I heard him saying, 'That is for you and ten times 
more the like of it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 806

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer prayer he used to keep arms away (from the body) so that the 
whiteness of his armpits was visible.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 807

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Wail:
Hadith: Hudhaifa said, "I saw a person not performing his bowing and prostrations perfectly. When he 
completed the prayer, I told him that he had not prayed." I think that Hudhaifa added (i.e. said to the 
man), "Had you died, you would have died on a tradition other than that of the Prophet (ﷺ) Muhammad."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 808

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) was ordered (by Allah) to prostrate on seven parts and not to tuck up the clothes or hair 
(while praying). Those parts are: the forehead (along with the tip of nose), both hands, both knees, and 
(toes of) both feet.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 809

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "We have been ordered to prostrates on seven bones and not to tuck up the clothes 
or hair."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 810

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara' bin `Azib:
Hadith: (He was not a liar) We used to pray behind the Prophet (ﷺ) and when he said, "Sami`a l-lahu liman 
hamidah", none of us would bend his back (to go for prostration) till the Prophet (ﷺ) had placed his, 
forehead on the ground.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 811

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I have been ordered to prostrate on seven bones i.e. on the forehead along with the 
tip of the nose and the Prophet (ﷺ) pointed towards his nose, both hands, both knees and the toes of both 
feet and not to gather the clothes or the hair."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 812

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Salama:
Hadith: Once I went to Abu- Sa`id Al-Khudri and asked him, "Won't you come with us to the date-palm trees 
to have a talk?" So Abu Sa`id went out and I asked him, "Tell me what you heard from the Prophet (ﷺ) 
about the Night of Qadr." Abu Sa`id replied, "Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) performed I`tikaf (seclusion) on 
the first ten days of the month of Ramadan and we did the same with him. Gabriel came to him and 
said, 'The night you are looking for is ahead of you.' So the Prophet (ﷺ) performed the I`tikaf in the 
middle (second) ten days of the month of Ramadan and we too performed I`tikaf with him. Gabriel 
came to him and said, 'The night which you are looking for is ahead of you.' In the morning of the 
20th of Ramadan the Prophet (ﷺ) delivered a sermon saying, 'Whoever has performed I`tikaf with me 
should continue it. I have been shown the Night of "Qadr", but have forgotten its date, but it is in the 
odd nights of the last ten nights. I saw in my dream that I was prostrating in mud and water.' In those 
days the roof of the mosque was made of branches of date-palm trees. At that time the sky was clear 
and no cloud was visible, but suddenly a cloud came and it rained. The Prophet (ﷺ) led us in the prayer 
and I saw the traces of mud on the forehead and on the nose of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). So it was the 
confirmation of that dream."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 813

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl bin Sa`d:
Hadith: The people used to pray with the Prophet (ﷺ) tying their Izars around their necks because of their small 
sizes and the women were directed that they should not raise their heads from the prostrations till the 
men had sat straight.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 814

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) was ordered to prostrate on seven bony parts and not to tuck up his clothes or hair.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 815

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I have been ordered to prostrate on seven (bones) and not to tuck up the hair or 
garment."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 816

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to say frequently in his bowing and prostrations "Subhanaka l-lahumma Rabbana 
wa bihamdika, Allahumma ghfir li" (Exalted [from unbecoming attributes] Are you O Allah our Lord, 
and by Your praise [do I exalt you]. O Allah! Forgive me). In this way [??] he was acting on what was 
explained to him in the Holy Qur'an.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 817

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
Hadith: Once Malik bin Huwairith said to his friends, "Shall I show you how Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to offer his 
prayers?" And it was not the time for any of the compulsory congregational prayers. So he stood up 
(for the prayer) bowed and said the Takbir, then he raised his head and remained standing for a while 
and then prostrated and raised his head for a while (sat up for a while). He prayed like our Sheikh 
`Amr Ibn Salama. (Aiyub said, "The latter used to do a thing which I did not see the people doing i.e. 
he used to sit between the third and the fourth rak`a). Malik bin Huwairith said, "We came to the 
Prophet (after embracing Islam) and stayed with him. He said to us, 'When you go back to your 
families, pray such and such a prayer at such and such a time, pray such and such a prayer at such and 
such a time, and when there is the time for the prayer then only of you should pronounce the Adhan 
for the prayer and the oldest of you should lead the prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 818, 819

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara':
Hadith: The time taken by the Prophet (ﷺ) in prostrations, bowing, and the sitting interval between the two 
prostrations was about the same.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 820

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Thabit:
Hadith: Anas said, "I will leave no stone unturned in making you offer the prayer as I have seen the Prophet (ﷺ) 
making us offer it." Anas used to do a thing which I have not seen you doing. He used to stand after 
the bowing for such a long time that one would think that he had forgotten (the prostrations) and he 
used to sit in-between the prostrations so long that one would think that he had forgotten the second 
prostration.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 821

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Be straight in the prostrations and none of you should put his forearms on the 
ground (in the prostration) like a dog."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 822

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Malik bin Huwairith Al-Laithi:
Hadith: I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) praying and in the odd rak`at, he used to sit for a moment before getting up.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 823

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aiyub:
Hadith: Abu Qilaba said, "Malik bin Huwairith came to us and led us in the prayer in this mosque of ours and 
said, 'I lead you in prayer but I do not want to offer the prayer but just to show you how Allah's 
Apostle performed his prayers." I asked Abu Qilaba, "How was the prayer of Malik bin Huwairith?" 
He replied, "Like the prayer of this Sheikh of ours-- i.e. `Amr bin Salima." That Sheikh used to 
pronounce the Takbir perfectly and when he raised his head from the second prostration he would sit 
for a while and then support himself on the ground and get up.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 824

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sa`id bin Al-Harith:
Hadith: Abu Sa`id led us in the prayer and said the Takbir aloud on arising from the prostration, and on 
prostrating, on rising again, and on getting up from the second rak`a. Abu Sa`id said, "I saw the 
Prophet doing the same."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 825

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mutarrif:
Hadith: `Imran and I prayed behind `Ali bin Abi Talib and he said Takbir on prostrating, on rising and on 
getting up after the two rak`at (i.e. after the second rak`a). When the prayer was finished, `Imran took 
me by the hand and said, "He (`Ali) has prayed the prayer of Muhammad" (or said, "He made us 
remember the prayer of Muhammad).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 826

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: I saw `Abdullah bin `Umar crossing his legs while sitting in the prayer and I, a mere youngster in 
those days, did the same. Ibn `Umar forbade me to do so, and said, "The proper way is to keep the 
right foot propped up and bend the left in the prayer." I said questioningly, "But you are doing so 
(crossing the legs)." He said, "My feet cannot bear my weight."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 827

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin `Amr bin `Ata':
Hadith: I was sitting with some of the companions of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and we were discussing about the way of 
praying of the Prophet. Abu Humaid As-Sa`idi said, "I remember the prayer of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) better 
than any one of you. I saw him raising both his hands up to the level of the shoulders on saying the 
Takbir; and on bowing he placed his hands on both knees and bent his back straight, then he stood up 
straight from bowing till all the vertebrate took their normal positions. In prostrations, he placed both 
his hands on the ground with the forearms away from the ground and away from his body, and his toes 
were facing the Qibla. On sitting In the second rak`a he sat on his left foot and propped up the right 
one; and in the last rak`a he pushed his left foot forward and kept the other foot propped up and sat 
over the buttocks."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 828

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Buhaina:
Hadith: (he was from the tribe of Uzd Shanu'a [??] and was the ally of the tribe of `Abdul-Manaf and was one 
of the companions of the Prophet): Once the Prophet (ﷺ) led us in the Zuhr prayer and stood up after the 
second rak`a and did not sit down. The people stood up with him. When the prayer was about to end 
and the people were waiting for him to say the Taslim, he said Takbir while sitting and prostrated 
twice before saying the Taslim and then he said the Taslim."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 829

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) led us in the Zuhr prayer and got up (after the prostrations of the second rak`a) 
although he should have sat (for the Tashahhud). So at the end of the prayer, he prostrated twice 
while sitting (prostrations of Sahu).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 830

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Shaqiq bin Salama:
Hadith: `Abdullah said, "Whenever we prayed behind the Prophet (ﷺ) we used to recite (in sitting) 'Peace be on 
Gabriel, Michael, peace be on so and so. Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) looked back at us and said, 'Allah 
Himself is As-Salam (Peace), and if anyone of you prays then he should say, at-Tahiyatu li l-lahi wa ssalawatu 
wa t-taiyibat. As-salamu `alalika aiyuha n-Nabiyu wa rahmatu l-lahi wa barakatuh. Assalamu 
`alaina wa `ala `ibadi l-lahi s-salihin. (All the compliments, prayers and good things are due to 
Allah; peace be on you, O Prophet, and Allah's mercy and blessings [be on you]. Peace be on us an on 
the pious subjects of Allah). (If you say that, it will reach all the subjects in the heaven and the earth). 
Ash-hadu al-la ilaha illa l-lah, wa ash-hadu anna Muhammadan `Abduhu wa Rasuluh. (I testify that 
there is no Deity [worthy of worship] but Allah, and I testify that Muhammad is His slave and His 
Apostle).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 831

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to invoke Allah in the prayer saying "Allahumma inni 
a`udhu bika min `adhabi l-qabr, wa a`udhu bika min fitnati l-masihi d-dajjal, wa a`udhu bika min 
fitnati l-mahya wa fitnati l-mamat. Allahumma inni a`udhu bika mina l-ma'thami wa l-maghram. (O 
Allah, I seek refuge with You from the punishment of the grave, from the afflictions of the imposter- 
Messiah, and from the afflictions of life and death. O Allah, I seek refuge with You from sins and 
from debt)." Somebody said to him, "Why do you so frequently seek refuge with Allah from being in 
debt?" The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "A person in debt tells lies whenever he speaks, and breaks promises 
whenever he makes (them)." `Aisha also narrated: I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) in his prayer seeking refuge 
with Allah from the afflictions of Ad-Dajjal.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 832, 833

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Bakr As-Siddiq:
Hadith: I asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) to teach me an invocation so that I may invoke Allah with it in my prayer. He 
told me to say, "Allahumma inni zalumtu nafsi zulman kathiran, Wala yaghfiru dh-dhunuba illa anta, 
fa ghfir li maghfiratan min `indika, wa r-hamni, innaka anta l-ghafuru r-rahim (O Allah! I have done 
great injustice to myself and none except You forgives sins, so bestow on me a forgiveness from You, 
and Have Mercy on me, You are the Forgiver, the Merciful).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 834

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: When we prayed with the Prophet (ﷺ) we used to say, "Peace be on Allah from His slaves and peace be on 
so and so." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Don't say As-Salam be on Allah, for He Himself is As-Salam, but say, 
at-tahiyatu li l-lahi wa s-salawatu wa t-taiyibat. As-salamu `alaika aiyuha n-Nabiyu wa rahmatu l-lahi 
wa barakatuh. As-salamu `alaina wa `ala `ibadi l-lahi s-salihin. (If you say this then it will reach all the 
slaves in heaven or between heaven and earth). Ash-hadu al la-ilaha illa l-lah, wa ash-hadu anna 
Muhammadan `Abduhu wa Rasuluh.' Then select the invocation you like best and recite it." (See 
Hadith No. 794, 795 & 796).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 835

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) prostrating in mud and water and saw the mark of mud on his forehead.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 836

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Salama:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) finished his prayers with Taslim, the women would get up and he would 
stay on for a while in his place before getting up. Ibn Shihab said, "I think (and Allah knows better), 
that the purpose of his stay was that the women might leave before the men who had finished their 
prayer. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 837

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Itban bin Malik:
Hadith: We prayed with the Prophet (ﷺ) and used to finish our prayer with the Taslim along with him.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 838

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi`:
Hadith: I remember Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and also the mouthful of water which he took from a bucket in our house 
and ejected (on me). I heard from `Itban bin Malik Al-Ansari, who was one from Bani Salim, saying, 
"I used to lead my tribe of Bani Salim in prayer. Once I went to the Prophet (ﷺ) and said to him, 'I have 
weak eyesight and at times the rainwater flood intervenes between me and the mosque of my tribe and 
I wish that you would come to my house and pray at some place so that I could take that place as a 
place for praying (mosque). He said, "Allah willing, I shall do that." Next day Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) along 
with Abu Bakr, came to my house after the sun had risen high and he asked permission to enter. I gave 
him permission, but he didn't sit till he said to me, "Where do you want me to pray in your house?" I 
pointed to a place in the house where I wanted him to pray. So he stood up for the prayer and we 
aligned behind him. He completed the prayer with Taslim and we did the same simultaneously."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 839, 840

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Ma`bad:
Hadith: (the freed slave of Ibn `Abbas) Ibn `Abbas told me, "In the lifetime of the Prophet (ﷺ) it was the custom to 
celebrate Allah's praises aloud after the compulsory congregational prayers." Ibn `Abbas further said, 
"When I heard the Dhikr, I would learn that the compulsory congregational prayer had ended."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 841

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: I used to recognize the completion of the prayer of the Prophet (ﷺ) by hearing Takbir.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 842

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Some poor people came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and said, "The wealthy people will get higher grades and will 
have permanent enjoyment and they pray like us and fast as we do. They have more money by which 
they perform the Hajj, and `Umra; fight and struggle in Allah's Cause and give in charity." The 
Prophet said, "Shall I not tell you a thing upon which if you acted you would catch up with those who 
have surpassed you? Nobody would overtake you and you would be better than the people amongst 
whom you live except those who would do the same. Say "Subhana l-lah", "Al hamdu li l-lah" and 
"Allahu Akbar" thirty three times each after every (compulsory) prayer." We differed and some of us 
said that we should say, "Subhan-al-lah" thirty three times and "Al hamdu li l-lah" thirty three times 
and "Allahu Akbar" thirty four times. I went to the Prophet (ﷺ) who said, "Say, "Subhan-al-lah" and "Al 
hamdu li l-lah" and "Allahu Akbar" all together [??], thirty three times."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 843

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Warrad:
Hadith: (the clerk of Al-Mughira bin Shu`ba) Once Al-Mughira dictated to me in a letter addressed to 
Muawiya that the Prophet (ﷺ) used to say after every compulsory prayer, "La ilaha illa l-lahu wahdahu la 
sharika lahu, lahu l-mulku wa lahu l-hamdu, wa huwa `ala kulli shay'in qadir. Allahumma la mani`a 
lima a`taita, wa la mu`tiya lima mana`ta, wa la yanfa`u dhal-jaddi minka l-jadd. [There is no Deity but 
Allah, Alone, no Partner to Him. His is the Kingdom and all praise, and Omnipotent is he. O Allah! 
Nobody can hold back what you gave, nobody can give what You held back, and no struggler's effort 
can benefit against You]." And Al-Hasan said, "Al-jadd' means prosperity [??]."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 844

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Samura bin Jundub:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to face us on completion of the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 845

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) led us in the Fajr prayer at Hudaibiya after a rainy night. On completion of the prayer, he 
faced the people and said, "Do you know what your Lord has said (revealed)?" The people replied, 
"Allah and His Apostle know better." He said, "Allah has said, 'In this morning some of my slaves 
remained as true believers and some became non-believers; whoever said that the rain was due to the 
Blessings and the Mercy of Allah had belief in Me and he disbelieves in the stars, and whoever said 
that it rained because of a particular star had no belief in Me but believes in that star.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 846

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) delayed the `Isha' prayer until midnight and then came to us. Having prayed he 
faced us and said, "The people had prayed and slept but you were in the prayer as long as you were 
waiting for it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 847

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Nafi:
Hadith: Ibn Umar used to offer prayers (Nawafil) at the place where he had offered the compulsory prayer. Al-Qasim (bin Muhammad bin Abi Bakr) did the same. The narration coming from Abu Hurairah (from the Prophet (ﷺ)) forbidding the Imam from offering prayers (optional prayer) at the same place where he was offered the compulsory prayer is incorrect.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 848

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Salama:
Hadith: "The Prophet (ﷺ) after finishing the prayer with Taslim used to stay at his place for a while." Ibn Shihab 
said, "I think (and Allah knows better), that he used to wait for the departure of the women who had 
prayed." Ibn Shihab wrote that he had heard it from Hind bint Al-Harith Al-Firasiya from Um Salama, 
the wife of the Prophet (Hind was from the companions of Um Salama) who said, "When the Prophet (ﷺ) 
finished the prayer with Taslim, the women would depart and enter their houses before Allah's 
Apostle departed."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 849, 850

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Uqba:
Hadith: I offered the `Asr prayer behind the Prophet (ﷺ) at Medina. When he had finished the prayer with Taslim, 
he got up hurriedly and went out by crossing the rows of the people to one of the dwellings of his 
wives. The people got scared at his speed . The Prophet (ﷺ) came back and found the people surprised at 
his haste and said to them, "I remembered a piece of gold Lying in my house and I did not like it to 
divert my attention from Allah's worship, so I have ordered it to be distributed (in charity).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 851

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah:
Hadith: You should not give away a part of your prayer to Satan by thinking that it is necessary to depart (after 
finishing the prayer) from one's right side only; I have seen the Prophet (ﷺ) often leave from the left side.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 852

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: During the holy battle of Khaibar the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever ate from this plant (i.e. garlic) should 
not enter our mosque."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 853

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Ata':
Hadith: I heard Jabir bin `Abdullah saying, "The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'Whoever eats (from) this plant (he meant 
garlic) should keep away from our mosque." I said, "What does he mean by that?" He replied, "I think 
he means only raw garlic."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 854

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever eats garlic or onion should keep away from our mosque or should remain 
in his house." (Jabir bin `Abdullah, in another narration said, "Once a big pot containing cooked 
vegetables was brought. On finding unpleasant smell coming from it, the Prophet (ﷺ) asked, 'What is in 
it?' He was told all the names of the vegetables that were in it. The Prophet (ﷺ) ordered that it should be 
brought near to some of his companions who were with him. When the Prophet (ﷺ) saw it he disliked to 
eat it and said, 'Eat. (I don't eat) for I converse with those whom you don't converse with (i.e. the 
angels).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 855

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdul `Aziz:
Hadith: A man asked Anas, "What did you hear from the Prophet (ﷺ) about garlic?" He said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 
'Whoever has eaten this plant should neither come near us nor pray with us."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 856

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sulaiman Ash-Shaibani:
Hadith: I heard Ash-Shu`bi saying, "A person who was accompanying the Prophet (ﷺ) passed by a grave that was 
separated from the other graves told me that the Prophet (ﷺ) once led the people in the (funeral) prayer 
and the people had aligned behind him. I said, "O Aba `Amr! Who told you about it?" He said, "Ibn `Abbas."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 857

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Ghusl (taking a bath) on Friday is compulsory for every Muslim reaching the age 
of puberty."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 858

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: One night I slept at the house of my aunt Maimuna and the Prophet (ﷺ) slept (too). He got up (for prayer) 
in the last hours of the night and performed a light ablution from a hanging leather skin. (`Amr, the 
sub-narrator described that the ablution was very light). Then he stood up for prayer and I got up too 
and performed the ablution in the same way and joined him on his left side. He pulled me to the right 
and prayed as much as Allah will. Then he lay down and slept and I heard his breath sounds till the 
Mu'adh-dhin came to him to inform him about the (Fajr) prayer. He left with him for the prayer and 
prayed without repeating the ablution. (Sufyan the sub-narrator said: We said to `Amr, "Some people 
say, 'The eyes of the Prophet (ﷺ) sleep but his heart never sleeps.' " `Amr said, "'Ubai bin `Umar said, 'The 
dreams of the Prophets are Divine Inspirations. Then he recited, '(O my son), I have seen in dream that 
I was slaughtering you (offering you in sacrifice).") (37.102)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 859

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: My grandmother Mulaika invited Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) for a meal which she had prepared specially for him. 
He ate some of it and said, "Get up. I shall lead you in the prayer." I brought a mat that had become 
black owing to excessive use and I sprinkled water on it. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stood on it and prayed two 
rak`at; and the orphan was with me (in the first row), and the old lady stood behind us.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 860

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Once I came riding a she-ass and I, then, had just attained the age of puberty. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was 
leading the people in prayer at Mina facing no wall. I passed in front of the row and let loose the sheass 
for grazing and joined the row and no one objected to my deed.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 861

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) delayed the `Isha' prayer till `Umar informed him that the women and children 
had slept. Then Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came out and said: "None from amongst the dwellers of earth have 
prayed this prayer except you." In those days none but the people of Medina prayed.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 862

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdur Rahman bin `Abis:
Hadith: A person asked Ibn `Abbas, "Have you ever presented yourself at the (`Id) prayer with Allah's 
Apostle?" He replied, "Yes." And had it not been for my kinship (position) with the Prophet (ﷺ) it would 
not have been possible for me to do so (for he was too young). The Prophet (ﷺ) went to the mark near the 
house of Kathir bin As-Salt and delivered a sermon. He then went towards the women. He advised 
and reminded them and asked them to give alms. So the woman would bring her hand near her neck 
and take off her necklace and put it in the garment of Bilal. Then the Prophet (ﷺ) and Bilal came to the 
house."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 863

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) delayed the `Isha' prayer till `Umar informed him that the women and children 
had slept. The Prophet (ﷺ) came out and said, "None except you from amongst the dwellers of earth is 
waiting for this prayer." In those days, there was no prayer except in Medina and they used to pray the 
`Isha' prayer between the disappearance of the twilight and the first third of the night.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 864

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "If your women ask permission to go to the mosque at night, allow them."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 865

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Salama:
Hadith: (the wife of the Prophet) In the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) the women used to get up when they 
finished their compulsory prayers with Taslim. The Prophet (ﷺ) and the men would stay on at their places 
as long as Allah will. When the Prophet (ﷺ) got up, the men would then get up.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 866

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) finished the Fajr prayer, the women would leave covered in their sheets and 
were not recognized owing to the darkness.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 867

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada Al-Ansari:
Hadith: My father said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "Whenever I stand for prayer, I want to prolong it but on 
hearing the cries of a child, I would shorten it as I dislike to put its mother in trouble."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 868

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Had Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) known what the women were doing, he would have forbidden them from going to 
the mosque as the women of Bani Israel had been forbidden. Yahya bin Sa`id (a sub-narrator) asked 
`Amra (another sub-narrator), "Were the women of Bani Israel forbidden?" She replied "Yes."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 869

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um Salama:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) completed the prayer with Taslim, the women used to get up immediately 
and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) would remain at his place for someone before getting up. (The sub-narrator (Az- 
Zuhri) said, "We think, and Allah knows better, that he did so, so that the women might leave before 
men could get in touch with them).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 870

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed in the house of Um Sulaim; and I, along with an orphan stood behind him while 
Um Sulaim (stood) behind us.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 871

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to offer the Fajr prayer when it was still dark and the believing women used to 
return (after finishing their prayer) and nobody could recognize them owing to darkness, or they could 
not recognize one another.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 872

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salim bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: My father said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'If the wife of any one of you asks permission (to go to the mosque) do not forbid her."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 873

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) prayed in the house of Um Sulaim; and I, along with an orphan stood behind him while Um Sulaim (stood) behind us.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 874

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Umm Salama:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) completed the Salat with Taslim, the women used to get up immediately and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)  would remain at his place for sometime before getting up. The subnarrator (Az-Zuhri) said, "We think, and Allah knows better, that he did so, so that the women might leave before the men could catch up with them."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 875

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) saying, "We (Muslims) are the last (to come) but (will be) the 
foremost on the Day of Resurrection though the former nations were given the Holy Scriptures before 
us. And this was their day (Friday) the celebration of which was made compulsory for them but they 
differed about it. So Allah gave us the guidance for it (Friday) and all the other people are behind us in 
this respect: the Jews' (holy day is) tomorrow (i.e. Saturday) and the Christians' (is) the day after 
tomorrow (i.e. Sunday)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 876

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) said, "Anyone of you attending the Friday (prayers) should take a bath."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 877

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: While `Umar bin Al-Khattab was standing and delivering the sermon on a Friday, one of the 
companions of the Prophet, who was one of the foremost Muhajirs (emigrants) came. `Umar said to 
him, "What is the time now?" He replied, "I was busy and could not go back to my house till I heard 
the Adhan. I did not perform more than the ablution." Thereupon `Umar said to him, "Did you 
perform only the ablution although you know that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) used to order us to take a 
bath (on Fridays)?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 878

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) said, "The taking of a bath on Friday is compulsory for every male (Muslim) 
who has attained the age of puberty."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 879

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id:
Hadith: I testify that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "The taking of a bath on Friday is compulsory for every male 
Muslim who has attained the age of puberty and (also) the cleaning of his teeth with Siwak, and the 
using of perfume if it is available." `Amr (a sub-narrator) said, "I confirm that the taking of a bath is 
compulsory, but as for the Siwak and the using of perfume, Allah knows better whether it is 
obligatory or not, but according to the Hadith it is as above.")
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 880

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) said, "Any person who takes a bath on Friday like the bath of Janaba and 
then goes for the prayer (in the first hour i.e. early), it is as if he had sacrificed a camel (in Allah's 
cause); and whoever goes in the second hour it is as if he had sacrificed a cow; and whoever goes in 
the third hour, then it is as if he had sacrificed a horned ram; and if one goes in the fourth hour, then it 
is as if he had sacrificed a hen; and whoever goes in the fifth hour then it is as if he had offered an 
egg. When the Imam comes out (i.e. starts delivering the Khutba), the angels present themselves to 
listen to the Khutba."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 881

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: While `Umar (bin Al-Khattab) was delivering the Khutba on a Friday, a man entered (the mosque). 
`Umar asked him, "What has detained you from the prayer?" The man said, "It was only that when I 
heard the Adhan I performed ablution (for the prayer)." On that `Umar said, "Did you not hear the 
Prophet saying: 'Anyone of you going out for the Jumua prayer should take a bath'?".
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 882

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salman-Al-Farsi:
Hadith: The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Whoever takes a bath on Friday, purifies himself as much as he can, then 
uses his (hair) oil or perfumes himself with the scent of his house, then proceeds (for the Jumua 
prayer) and does not separate two persons sitting together (in the mosque), then prays as much as 
(Allah has) written for him and then remains silent while the Imam is delivering the Khutba, his sins 
in-between the present and the last Friday would be forgiven."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 883

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Tawus:
Hadith: I said to Ibn `Abbas, "The people are narrating that the Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'Take a bath on Friday and wash 
your heads (i.e. take a thorough bath) even though you were not Junub and use perfume'." On that Ibn 
`Abbas replied, "I know about the bath, (i.e. it is essential) but I do not know about the perfume (i.e. 
whether it is essential or not.)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 884

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Tawus:
Hadith: Ibn `Abbas mentioned the statement of the Prophet (ﷺ) regarding the taking of a bath on Friday and then I 
asked him whether the Prophet (p.b.u.h) had ordered perfume or (hair) oil to be used if they could be 
found in one's house. He (Ibn `Abbas) replied that he did not know about it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 885

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: `Umar bin Al-Khattab saw a silken cloak (being sold) at the gate of the Mosque and said to Allah's 
Apostle, "I wish you would buy this to wear on Fridays and also on occasions of the arrivals of the 
delegations." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "This will be worn by a person who will have no share (reward) 
in the Hereafter." Later on similar cloaks were given to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and he gave one of them to 
`Umar bin Al-Khattab. On that `Umar said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! You have given me this cloak 
although on the cloak of Atarid (a cloak merchant who was selling that silken cloak at the gate of the 
mosque) you passed such and such a remark." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "I have not given you this to 
wear". And so `Umar bin Al-Khattab gave it to his pagan brother in Mecca to wear.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 886

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "If I had not found it hard for my followers or the people, I would have ordered 
them to clean their teeth with Siwak for every prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 887

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "I have told you repeatedly to use the Siwak. (The Prophet (ﷺ) put emphasis on the use of the Siwak.)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 888

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Hadith: When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) got up at night (for the night prayer), he used to clean his mouth .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 889

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: `Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr came holding a Siwak with which he was cleaning his teeth. Allah's 
Apostle looked at him. I requested `Abdur-Rahman to give the Siwak to me and after he gave it to me 
I divided it, chewed it and gave it to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). Then he cleaned his teeth with it and (at that 
time) he was resting against my chest.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 890

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to recite the following in the Fajr prayer of Friday, "Alif, Lam, Mim, Tanzil" (Suratas- 
Sajda #32) and "Hal-ata-ala-l-Insani" (i.e. Surah-Ad-Dahr #76).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 891

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The first Jumua prayer which was offered after a Jumua prayer offered at the mosque of Allah's 
Apostle took place in the mosque of the tribe of `Abdul Qais at Jawathi in Bahrain.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 892

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, "All of you are Guardians." Yunis said: Ruzaiq bin Hukaim wrote to 
Ibn Shihab while I was with him at Wadi-al-Qura saying, "Shall I lead the Jumua prayer?" Ruzaiq was 
working on the land (i.e. farming) and there was a group of Sudanese people and some others with 
him; Ruzaiq was then the Governor of Aila. Ibn Shihab wrote (to Ruzaiq) ordering him to lead the 
Jumua prayer and telling him that Salim told him that `Abdullah bin `Umar had said, "I heard Allah's 
Apostle saying, 'All of you are guardians and responsible for your wards and the things under your 
care. The Imam (i.e. ruler) is the guardian of his subjects and is responsible for them and a man is the 
guardian of his family and is responsible for them. A woman is the guardian of her husband's house 
and is responsible for it. A servant is the guardian of his master's belongings and is responsible for 
them.' I thought that he also said, 'A man is the guardian of his father's property and is responsible for 
it. All of you are guardians and responsible for your wards and the things under your care."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 893

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying, "Anyone of you coming for the Jumua prayer should take a bath."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 894

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "The taking of a bath on Friday is compulsory for every Muslim who has 
attained the age of puberty."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 895

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: 

     Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said "We are the last (to come amongst the nations) 
     but (will be) the foremost on the Day of Resurrection. They were given
     the Holy Scripture before us and we were given the Quran after them. 
     And this was the day (Friday) about which they differed and Allah gave
     us the guidance (for that). So tomorrow (i.e. Saturday) is the Jews' 
     (day), and the day after tomorrow (i.e. Sunday) is the Christians'." 
     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) remained silent (for a while) and then said, "It
     is obligatory for every Muslim that he should take a bath once in 
     seven days, when he should wash his head and body."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 896, 897

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira through different narrators that the Prophet (ﷺ) 
     said, "It is Allah's right on every Muslim that he should take a bath 
     (at least) once in seven days." 

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 898

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Allow women to go to the Mosques at night."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 899

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin Seereen:
Hadith: One of the wives of `Umar (bin Al-Khattab) used to offer the Fajr and the `Isha' prayer in 
congregation in the Mosque. She was asked why she had come out for the prayer as she knew that 
`Umar disliked it, and he has great ghaira (self-respect). She replied, "What prevents him from 
stopping me from this act?" The other replied, "The statement of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) : 'Do not 
stop Allah's women-slaves from going to Allah's Mosques' prevents him."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 900

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: On a rainy day Ibn `Abbas said to his Mu'adh-dhin, "After saying, 'Ash-hadu anna Muhammadan 
Rasulullah' (I testify that Muhammad is Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)), do not say 'Haiya 'Alas-Salat' (come for the 
prayer) but say 'Pray in your houses'." (The man did so). But the people disliked it. Ibn `Abbas said, 
"It was done by one who was much better than I (i.e. the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ). No doubt, the Jumua 
prayer is compulsory but I dislike to put you to task by bringing you out walking in mud and slush."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 901

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Yahya bin Sa`id:
Hadith: (the wife of the Prophet) The people used to come from their abodes and from Al-`Awali (i.e. 
outskirts of Medina up to a distance of four miles or more from Medina). They used to pass through 
dust and used to be drenched with sweat and covered with dust; so sweat used to trickle from them. 
One of them came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) who was in my house. The Prophet (ﷺ) said to him, "I wish that you 
keep yourself clean on this day of yours (i.e. take a bath)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 902

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: I asked `Amra about taking a bath on Fridays. She replied, " Aisha said, 'The people used to work (for 
their livelihood) and whenever they went for the Jumua prayer, they used to go to the mosque in the 
same shape as they had been in work. So they were asked to take a bath on Friday.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 903

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer the Jumua prayer immediately after midday.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 904

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: We used to offer the Jumua prayer early and then have an afternoon nap.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 905

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu `Abs:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer the prayer earlier if it was very cold; and if it was very hot he used to delay 
the prayer, i.e. the Jumua prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 906

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: I heard the Prophet (ﷺ) saying, "Anyone whose feet are covered with dust in Allah's cause, shall be saved 
by Allah from the Hell-Fire."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 907

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Abi Qatada on the authority of his father:
Hadith: heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)s (p.b.u.h) saying, "If the prayer is started do not run for it but just walk for it 
calmly and pray whatever you get, and complete whatever is missed. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 908

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salman Al-Farsi:
Hadith: The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Do not stand up (for prayer) unless you see me, and observe calmness and 
solemnity".
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 909

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) said, "Anyone who takes a bath on Friday and cleans himself as much as he 
can and puts oil (on his hair) or scents himself; and then proceeds for the prayer and does not force his 
way between two persons (assembled in the mosque for the Friday prayer), and prays as much as is 
written for him and remains quiet when the Imam delivers the Khutba, all his sins in between the 
present and the last Friday will be forgiven."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 910

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated As-Saib bin Yazid:
Hadith: I heard Nazi' saying, "Ibn `Umar, said, 'The Prophet (ﷺ) forbade that a man should make another man to 
get up to sit in his place' ". I said to Nafi`, 'Is it for Jumua prayer only?' He replied, "For Jumua prayer 
and any other (prayer)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 911

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated As-Saib bin Yazid:
Hadith: In the lifetime of the Prophet, Abu Bakr and `Umar, the Adhan for the Jumua prayer used to be 
pronounced when the Imam sat on the pulpit. But during the Caliphate of `Uthman when the Muslims 
increased in number, a third Adhan at Az-Zaura' was added. Abu `Abdullah said, "Az-Zaura' is a place 
in the market of Medina."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 912

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Umama bin Sahl bin Hunaif:
Hadith: The person who increased the number of Adhans for the Jumua prayers to three was `Uthman bin 
`Affan and it was when the number of the (Muslim) people of Medina had increased. In the lifetime of 
the Prophet (ﷺ) there was only one Mu'adh-dhin and the Adhan used to be pronounced only after the 
Imam had taken his seat (i.e. on the pulpit).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 913

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid I:
Hadith: I heard Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan (repeating the statements of the Adhan) while he was sitting on the 
pulpit. When the Mu'adh-dhin pronounced the Adhan saying, "Allahu-Akbar, Allahu Akbar", 
Muawiya said: "Allah Akbar, Allahu Akbar." And when the Mu'adh-dhin said, "Ash-hadu an la ilaha 
illal-lah (I testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah)", Muawiya said, "And (so do) I". 
When he said, "Ash-hadu anna Muhammadan Rasulullah" (I testify that Muhammad is Allah's 
Apostle), Muawiya said, "And (so do) I". When the Adhan was finished, Muawiya said, "O people, 
when the Mu'adh-dhin pronounced the Adhan I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) on this very pulpit saying what 
you have just heard me saying".
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 914

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
Hadith: `Uthman bin `Affan introduced the second Adhan on Fridays when the number of the people in the 
mosque increased. Previously the Adhan on Fridays used to be pronounced only after the Imam had 
taken his seat (on the pulpit).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 915

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Hazim bin Dinar:
Hadith: I heard As-Saib bin Yazid, saying, "In the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), and Abu Bakr and `Umar, the 
Adhan for the Jumua prayer used to be pronounced after the Imam had taken his seat on the pulpit. 
But when the people increased in number during the caliphate of `Uthman, he introduced a third 
Adhan (on Friday for the Jumua prayer) and it was pronounced at Az-Zaura' and that new state of 
affairs remained so in the succeeding years.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 916

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: Some people went to Sahl bin Sa`d As-Sa`idi and told him that they had different opinions regarding 
the wood of the pulpit. They asked him about it and he said, "By Allah, I know of what wood the 
pulpit was made, and no doubt I saw it on the very first day when Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) took his seat on it. 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) sent for such and such an Ansari woman (and Sahl mentioned her name) and said to 
her, 'Order your slave-carpenter to prepare for me some pieces of wood (i.e. pulpit) on which I may sit 
at the time of addressing the people.' So she ordered her slave-carpenter and he made it from the 
tamarisk of the forest and brought it (to the woman). The woman sent that (pulpit) to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
who ordered it to be placed here. Then I saw Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) praying on it and then bowed on it. Then 
he stepped back, got down and prostrated on the ground near the foot of the pulpit and again ascended 
the pulpit. After finishing the prayer he faced the people and said, 'I have done this so that you may 
follow me and learn the way I pray.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 917

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Salim:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to stand by a stem of a date-palm tree (while delivering a sermon). When the pulpit 
was placed for him we heard that stem crying like a pregnant she-camel till the Prophet (ﷺ) got down from 
the pulpit and placed his hand over it.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 918

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: My father said , "I heard the Prophet (ﷺ) delivering the Khutba on the pulpit and he said, 'Whoever comes 
for the Jumua prayer should take a bath (before coming).' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 919

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to deliver the Khutba while standing and then he would sit, then stand 
again as you do now-a-days.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 920

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Fatima bint Al-Mundhir:
Hadith: One day the Prophet (ﷺ) sat on the pulpit and we sat around him.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 921

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Amr bin Taghlib:
Hadith: Asma' bint Abi Bakr As-Siddiq said, "I went to 'Aishah and the people were offering Salat. I asked her, 'What is wrong with the people ?' She pointed towards the sky with her head. I asked her, 'Is there a sign ?' 'Aishah nodded with her head meaning 'Yes'." Asma' added, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) prolonged the Salat to such an extent that I fainted. There was a waterskin by my side and I opened it and poured some water on my head. When Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) finished Salat, and the solar eclipse had cleared, the Prophet (ﷺ) addressed the people and praised Allah as He deserves and said, 'Amma ba'du'." Asma' further said, "Some Ansari women started talking, so I turned to them in order to make them quiet. I asked 'Aishah what the Prophet (ﷺ) had said. 'Aishah said: 'He said, 'I have seen things at this place of mine which were never shown to me before; (I have seen) even Paradise and Hell. And, no doubt it has been revealed to me that you (people) will be put in trial in your graves like or nearly like the trial of Masih Ad-Dajjal. (The angels) will come to everyone of you and ask him, 'What do you know about this man (Prophet Muhammad (ﷺ)) ?" The faithful believer or firm believer (Hisham was in doubt which word the Prophet (ﷺ) used), will say, 'He is Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and he is Muhammad (ﷺ) who came to us with clear evidences and guidance. So we believed him, accepted his teachings and followed and trusted his teaching.' Then the angels will tell him to sleep (in peace) as they have come to know that he was a believer. But the hypocrite or a doubtful person (Hisham is not sure as to which word the Prophet (ﷺ) used), will be asked what he knew about this man (Prophet Muhammed (ﷺ)). He will say, 'I do not know but I heard the people saying something (about him) so I said the same' " Hisham added, "Fatima told me that she remembered that narration completely by heart except that she said about the hypocrite or a doubtful person that he will be punished severely."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 922

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: Some property or something was brought to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and he distributed it. He gave to some 
men and ignored the others. Later he got the news of his being admonished by those whom he had 
ignored. So he glorified and praised Allah and said, "Amma ba'du. By Allah, I may give to a man and 
ignore another, although the one whom I ignore is more beloved to me than the one whom I give. But 
I give to some people as I feel that they have no patience and no contentment in their hearts and I 
leave those who are patient and self-content with the goodness and wealth which Allah has put into 
their hearts and `Amr bin Taghlib is one of them." `Amr added, By Allah! Those words of Allah's 
Apostle are more beloved to me than the best red camels.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 923

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Hummaid As-Sa`idi:
Hadith: Once in the middle of the night Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) went out and prayed in the mosque and some 
men prayed with him. The next morning the people spoke about it and so more people gathered and 
prayed with him (in the second night). They circulated the news in the morning, and so, on the third 
night the number of people increased greatly. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) came out and they prayed 
behind him. On the fourth night the mosque was overwhelmed by the people till it could not 
accommodate them. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) came out only for the Fajr prayer and when he finished the 
prayer, he faced the people and recited "Tashah-hud" (I testify that none has the right to be 
worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is His Apostle), and then said, "Amma ba'du. Verily your 
presence (in the mosque at night) was not hidden from me, but I was afraid that this prayer (Prayer of 
Tahajjud) might be made compulsory and you might not be able to carry it out."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 924

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
Hadith: One night Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) stood up after the prayer and recited "Tashah-hud" and then 
praised Allah as He deserved and said, "Amma ba'du."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 925

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Once Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) got up for delivering the Khutba and I heard him after "Tashah-hud" saying 
"Amma ba'du."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 926

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (ﷺ) ascended the pulpit and it was the last gathering in which he took part. He was 
covering his shoulder with a big cloak and binding his head with an oily bandage. He glorified and 
praised Allah and said, "O people! Come to me." So the people came and gathered around him and he 
then said, "Amma ba'du." "From now onward the Ansar will decrease and other people will increase. 
So anybody who becomes a ruler of the followers of Muhammad and has the power to harm or benefit 
people then he should accept the good from the benevolent amongst them (Ansar) and overlook the 
faults of their wrong-doers."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 927

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to deliver two Khutbas and sit in between them.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 928

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "When it is a Friday, the angels stand at the gate of the mosque and keep on writing 
the names of the persons coming to the mosque in succession according to their arrivals. The example 
of the one who enters the mosque in the earliest hour is that of one offering a camel (in sacrifice). The 
one coming next is like one offering a cow and then a ram and then a chicken and then an egg 
respectively. When the Imam comes out (for Jumua prayer) they (i.e. angels) fold their papers and 
listen to the Khutba."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 929

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir:
Hadith: A person entered the mosque while the Prophet (ﷺ) was delivering the Khutba on a Friday. The Prophet (ﷺ) 
said to him, "Have you prayed?" The man replied in the negative. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Get up and pray 
two rak`at."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 930

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: A man entered the Mosque while the Prophet (ﷺ) was delivering the Khutba. The Prophet (ﷺ) said to him, 
"Have you prayed?" The man replied in the negative. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Pray two rak`at."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 931

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: While the Prophet (ﷺ) was delivering the Khutba on a Friday, a man stood up and said, "O, Allah's 
Apostle! The livestock and the sheep are dying, so pray to Allah for rain." So he (the Prophet) raised 
both his hands and invoked Allah (for it).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 932

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Once in the lifetime of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) the people were afflicted with drought (famine). While 
the Prophet (ﷺ) was delivering the Khutba on a Friday, a Bedouin stood up and said, "O, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! 
Our possessions are being destroyed and the children are hungry; Please invoke Allah (for rain)". So 
the Prophet (ﷺ) raised his hands. At that time there was not a trace of cloud in the sky. By Him in Whose 
Hands my soul is as soon as he lowered his hands, clouds gathered like mountains, and before he got 
down from the pulpit, I saw the rain falling on the beard of the Prophet. It rained that day, the next 
day, the third day, the fourth day till the next Friday. The same Bedouin or another man stood up and 
said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! The houses have collapsed, our possessions and livestock have been 
drowned; Please invoke Allah (to protect us)". So the Prophet (ﷺ) raised both his hands and said, "O 
Allah! Round about us and not on us". So, in whatever direction he pointed with his hands, the clouds 
dispersed and cleared away, and Medina's (sky) became clear as a hole in between the clouds. The 
valley of Qanat remained flooded, for one month, none came from outside but talked about the 
abundant rain.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 933

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) said, "When the Imam is delivering the Khutba, and you ask your companion 
to keep quiet and listen, then no doubt you have done an evil act."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 934

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) talked about Friday and said, "There is an hour (opportune time) on Friday 
and if a Muslim gets it while praying and asks something from Allah, then Allah will definitely meet 
his demand." And he (the Prophet) pointed out the shortness of that time with his hands.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 935

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: While we were praying (Jumua Khutba & prayer) with the Prophet (p.b.u.h), some camels loaded with 
food, arrived (from Sham). The people diverted their attention towards the camels (and left the 
mosque), and only twelve persons remained with the Prophet. So this verse was revealed: "But when 
they see Some bargain or some amusement, They disperse headlong to it, And leave you standing." 
(62.11)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 936

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl bin Sa`d:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to pray two rak`at before the Zuhr prayer and two rak`at after it. He also used to 
pray two rak`at after the Maghrib prayer in his house, and two rak`at after the `Isha' prayer. He never 
prayed after Jumua prayer till he departed (from the Mosque), and then he would pray two rak`at at 
home.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 937

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl:
Hadith: There was a woman amongst us who had a farm and she used to sow Silq (a kind of vegetable) on the 
edges of streams in her farm. On Fridays she used to pull out the Silq from its roots and put the roots 
in a utensil. Then she would put a handful of powdered barley over it and cook it. The roots of the Silq 
were a substitute for meat. After finishing the Jumua prayer we used to greet her and she would give 
us that food which we would eat with our hands, and because of that meal, we used to look forward to 
Friday.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 938

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: As above with the addition: We never had an afternoon nap nor meals except after offering the Jumua 
prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 939

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sahl:
Hadith: We used to offer the Jumua prayer early and then have the afternoon nap.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 940

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Shu'aib:
Hadith: I asked Az-Zuhri, "Did the Prophet (ﷺ) ever offer the Fear Prayer?" Az-Zuhri said, "I was told by Salim 
that `Abdullah bin `Umar I had said, 'I took part in a holy battle with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I in Najd. We 
faced the enemy and arranged ourselves in rows. Then Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) stood up to lead the 
prayer and one party stood to pray with him while the other faced the enemy. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) 
and the former party bowed and performed two prostrations. Then that party left and took the place of 
those who had not prayed. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) prayed one rak`a (with the latter) and performed two 
prostrations and finished his prayer with Taslim. Then everyone of them bowed once and performed 
two prostrations individually.' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 942

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Nafi`:
Hadith: Ibn `Umar said something similar to Mujahid's saying: Whenever (Muslims and non-Muslims) stand 
face to face in battle, the Muslims can pray while standing. Ibn `Umar added, "The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'If 
the number of the enemy is greater than the Muslims, they can pray while standing or riding 
(individually).' "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 943

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: Once the Prophet (p.b.u.h) led the fear prayer and the people stood behind him. He said Takbir 
(Allahu-Akbar) and the people said the same. He bowed and some of them bowed. Then he prostrated 
and they also prostrated. Then he stood for the second rak`a and those who had prayed the first rak`a 
left and guarded their brothers. The second party joined him and performed bowing and prostration 
with him. All the people were in prayer but they were guarding one another during the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 944

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: On the day of the Khandaq `Umar came, cursing the disbelievers of Quraish and said, "O Allah's 
Apostle! I have not offered the `Asr prayer and the sun has set." The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "By Allah! I too, 
have not offered the prayer yet. "The Prophet (ﷺ) then went to Buthan, performed ablution and performed 
the `Asr prayer after the sun had set and then offered the Maghrib prayer after it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 945

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: When the Prophet (ﷺ) returned from the battle of Al-Ahzab (The confederates), he said to us, "None should offer the 'Asr prayer but at Bani Quraiza." The 'Asr prayer became due for some of them on the way. Some of them decided not to offer the Salat but at Bani Quraiza while others decided to offer the Salat on the spot and said that the intention of the Prophet (ﷺ) was not what the former party had understood. And when that was told to the Prophet (ﷺ) he did not blame anyone of them.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 946

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) offered the Fajr prayer when it was still dark, then he rode and said, 'Allah 
Akbar! Khaibar is ruined. When we approach near to a nation, the most unfortunate is the morning of 
those who have been warned." The people came out into the streets saying, "Muhammad and his 
army." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) vanquished them by force and their warriors were killed; the children and 
women were taken as captives. Safiya was taken by Dihya Al-Kalbi and later she belonged to Allah's 
Apostle go who married her and her Mahr was her manumission.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 947

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: `Umar bought a silk cloak from the market, took it to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! 
Take it and adorn yourself with it during the `Id and when the delegations visit you." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
(p.b.u.h) replied, "This dress is for those who have no share (in the Hereafter)." After a long period 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) sent to `Umar a cloak of silk brocade. `Umar came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
(p.b.u.h) with the cloak and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! You said that this dress was for those who had 
no share (in the Hereafter); yet you have sent me this cloak." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said to him, "Sell it and 
fulfill your needs by it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 948

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) came to my house while two girls were singing beside me the songs of Buath 
(a story about the war between the two tribes of the Ansar, the Khazraj and the Aus, before Islam). 
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) lay down and turned his face to the other side. Then Abu Bakr came and spoke 
to me harshly saying, "Musical instruments of Satan near the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
(p.b.u.h) turned his face towards him and said, "Leave them." When Abu Bakr became inattentive, I 
signaled to those girls to go out and they left. It was the day of `Id, and the Black people were playing 
with shields and spears; so either I requested the Prophet (p.b.u.h) or he asked me whether I would 
like to see the display. I replied in the affirmative. Then the Prophet (p.b.u.h) made me stand behind 
him and my cheek was touching his cheek and he was saying, "Carry on! O Bani Arfida," till I got 
tired. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) asked me, "Are you satisfied (Is that sufficient for you)?" I replied in the 
affirmative and he told me to leave.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 949, 950

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara':
Hadith: I heard the Prophet (p.b.u.h) delivering a Khutba saying, "The first thing to be done on this day (first 
day of `Id ul Adha) is to pray; and after returning from the prayer we slaughter our sacrifices (in the 
name of Allah) and whoever does so, he acted according to our Sunna (traditions)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 951

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: Abu Bakr came to my house while two small Ansari girls were singing beside me the stories of the 
Ansar concerning the Day of Buath. And they were not singers. Abu Bakr said protestingly, "Musical 
instruments of Satan in the house of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) !" It happened on the `Id day and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
said, "O Abu Bakr! There is an `Id for every nation and this is our `Id."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 952

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) never proceeded (for the prayer) on the Day of `Id-ul-Fitr unless he had eaten some 
dates. Anas also narrated: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to eat odd number of dates.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 953

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Whoever slaughtered (his sacrifice) before the `Id prayer, should slaughter again." 
A man stood up and said, "This is the day on which one has desire for meat," and he mentioned 
something about his neighbors. It seemed that the Prophet (ﷺ) I believed him. Then the same man added, 
"I have a young she-goat which is dearer to me than the meat of two sheep." The Prophet (ﷺ) permitted 
him to slaughter it as a sacrifice. I do not know whether that permission was valid only for him or for 
others as well.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 954

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara' bin `Azib:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) delivered the Khutba after offering the prayer on the Day of Nahr and said, "Whoever 
offers the prayer like us and slaughters like us then his Nusuk (sacrifice) will be accepted by Allah. 
And whoever slaughters his sacrifice before the `Id prayer then he has not done the sacrifice." Abi 
Burda bin Niyar, the uncle of Al-Bara' said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I have slaughtered my sheep before 
the `Id prayer and I thought today as a day of eating and drinking (not alcoholic drinks), and I liked 
that my sheep should be the first to be slaughtered in my house. So slaughtered my sheep and took my 
food before coming for the prayer." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The sheep which you have slaughtered is just 
mutton (not a Nusuk)." He (Abu Burda) said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I have a young she-goat which is 
dearer to me than two sheep. Will that be sufficient as a Nusuk on my behalf? "The Prophet (p.b.u.h) 
said, "Yes, it will be sufficient for you but it will not be sufficient (as a Nusuk) for anyone else after 
you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 955

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Sa`id Al-Khudri:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to proceed to the Musalla on the days of Id-ul-Fitr and Id-ul-Adha; the first thing to 
begin with was the prayer and after that he would stand in front of the people and the people would 
keep sitting in their rows. Then he would preach to them, advise them and give them orders, (i.e. 
Khutba). And after that if he wished to send an army for an expedition, he would do so; or if he 
wanted to give and order, he would do so, and then depart. The people followed this tradition till I 
went out with Marwan, the Governor of Medina, for the prayer of Id-ul-Adha or Id-ul-Fitr. 
When we reached the Musalla, there was a pulpit made by Kathir bin As-Salt. Marwan wanted to get 
up on that pulpit before the prayer. I got hold of his clothes but he pulled them and ascended the pulpit 
and delivered the Khutba before the prayer. I said to him, "By Allah, you have changed (the Prophet's 
tradition)." He replied, "O Abu Sa`id! Gone is that which you know." I said, "By Allah! What I know 
is better than what I do not know." Marwan said, "People do not sit to listen to our Khutba after the 
prayer, so I delivered the Khutba before the prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 956

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to offer the prayer of `Id-ul-Adha and `Id-ul-Fitr and then deliver the Khutba 
after the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 957

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
Hadith: `Ata' said, "Jabir bin `Abdullah said, 'The Prophet (ﷺ) went out on the Day of `Id-ul-Fitr and offered the 
prayer before delivering the Khutba, Ata told me that during the early days of Ibn Az-Zubair, Ibn 
`Abbas had sent a message to him telling him that the Adhan for the `Id Prayer was never pronounced 
(in the life time of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)) and the Khutba used to be delivered after the prayer. Ata told me 
that Ibn `Abbas and Jabir bin `Abdullah, had said, "There was no Adhan for the prayer of `Id-ul-Fitr 
and `Id-ul-Aqha." `Ata' said, "I heard Jabir bin `Abdullah saying, 'The Prophet (ﷺ) stood up and started 
with the prayer, and after it he delivered the Khutba. When the Prophet (ﷺ) of Allah (p.b.u.h) finished (the 
Khutba), he went to the women and preached to them, while he was leaning on Bilal's hand. Bilal was 
spreading his garment and the ladies were putting alms in it.' " I said to Ata, "Do you think it 
incumbent upon an Imam to go to the women and preach to them after finishing the prayer and 
Khutba?" `Ata' said, "No doubt it is incumbent on Imams to do so, and why should they not do so?"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 958, 959, 960, 961

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: I offered the `Id prayer with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), Abu Bakr, `Umar and `Uthman and all of them offered 
the prayer before delivering the Khutba.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 962

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), Abu Bakr and `Umar! used to offer the two `Id prayers before delivering the Khutba.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 963

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) offered a two rak`at prayer on the Day of Id ul Fitr and he did not pray before or after it. 
Then he went towards women along with Bilal and ordered them to pay alms and so they started 
giving their earrings and necklaces (in charity).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 964

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara' bin `Azib:
Hadith: The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "The first thing that we should do on this day of ours is to pray and then 
return to slaughter the sacrifice. So anyone who does so, he acted according to our Sunna (tradition), 
and whoever slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer, it was just meat which he presented to his 
family and would not be considered as Nusuk." A person from the Ansar named Abu Burda bin 
Niyyar said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I slaughtered the Nusuk (before the prayer) but I have a young shegoat 
which is better than an older sheep." The Prophet (ﷺ) I said, "Sacrifice it in lieu of the first, but it will 
be not sufficient (as a sacrifice) for anybody else after you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 965

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sa`id bin Jubair:
Hadith: I was with Ibn `Umar when a spear head pierced the sole of his foot and his foot stuck to the paddle 
of the saddle and I got down and pulled his foot out, and that happened in Mina. Al-Hajjaj got the 
news and came to inquire about his health and said, "Alas! If we could only know the man who 
wounded you!" Ibn `Umar said, "You are the one who wounded me." Al-Hajjaj said, "How is that?" 
Ibn `Umar said, "You have allowed the arms to be carried on a day on which nobody used to carry 
them and you allowed arms to be carried in the Haram even though it was not allowed before."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 966

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sa`id bin `Amr bin Sa`id bin Al-`Aas:
Hadith: Al-Hajjaj went to Ibn `Umar while I was present there. Al-Hajjaj asked Ibn `Umar, "How are you?" 
Ibn `Umar replied, "I am all right," Al-Hajjaj asked, "Who wounded you?" Ibn `Umar replied, "The 
person who allowed arms to be carried on the day on which it was forbidden to carry them (he meant 
Al-Hajjaj)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 967

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara':
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) delivered the Khutba on the day of Nahr (`Id-ul-Adha) and said, "The first thing we 
should do on this day of ours is to pray and then return and slaughter (our sacrifices). So anyone who 
does so he acted according to our Sunna; and whoever slaughtered before the prayer then it was just 
meat that he offered to his family and would not be considered as a sacrifice in any way. My uncle 
Abu Burda bin Niyyar got up and said, "O, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I slaughtered the sacrifice before the 
prayer but I have a young she-goat which is better than an older sheep." The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Slaughter 
it in lieu of the first and such a goat will not be considered as a sacrifice for anybody else after you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 968

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "No good deeds done on other days are superior to those done on these (first ten 
days of Dhul Hijja)." Then some companions of the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Not even Jihad?" He replied, "Not 
even Jihad, except that of a man who does it by putting himself and his property in danger (for Allah's 
sake) and does not return with any of those things."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 969

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin Abi Bakr Al-Thaqafi:
Hadith: While we were going from Mina to `Arafat, I asked Anas bin Malik, about Talbiya, "How did you use 
to say Talbiya in the company of the Prophet?" Anas said: "People used to say Talbiya and their 
saying was not objected to and they used to say Takbir and that was not objected to either. "
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 970

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um `Atiya:
Hadith: We used to be ordered to come out on the Day of `Id and even bring out the virgin girls from their 
houses and menstruating women so that they might stand behind the men and say Takbir along with 
them and invoke Allah along with them and hope for the blessings of that day and for purification 
from sins.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 971

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith:  On the day of `Id-ul-Fitr and `Id-ul-Adha a spear used to be planted in front of the Prophet (as a Sutra for the prayer) and then he would pray.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 972

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to proceed to the Musalla and an 'Anaza used to be carried before him and planted 
in the Musalla in front of him and he would pray facing it (as a Sutra).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 973

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad:
Hadith: Um 'Atiyya said: "Our Prophet ordered us to come out (on `Id day) with the mature girls and the 
virgins staying in seclusion." Hafsa narrated the above mentioned Hadith and added, "The mature girls 
or virgins staying in seclusion but the menstruating women had to keep away from the Musalla."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 974

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: I (in my boyhood) went out with the Prophet (ﷺ) on the day of `Id ul Fitr or Id-ul-Adha. The Prophet (ﷺ) 
prayed and then delivered the Khutba and then went towards the women, preached and advised them 
and ordered them to give alms.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 975

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara':
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) went towards Al-Baqi (the graveyard at Medina) on the day of Id-ul-Adha and offered a 
two-rak`at prayer (of `Id-ul-Adha) and then faced us and said, "On this day of ours, our first act of 
worship is the offering of prayer and then we will return and slaughter the sacrifice, and whoever does 
this concords with our Sunna; and whoever slaughtered his sacrifice before that (i.e. before the prayer) 
then that was a thing which he prepared earlier for his family and it would not be considered as a 
Nusuk (sacrifice.)" A man stood up and said, "O, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! I slaughtered (the animal before the 
prayer) but I have a young she-goat which is better than an older sheep." The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said to 
him, "Slaughter it. But a similar sacrifice will not be sufficient for anybody else after you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 976

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdur Rahman bin `Abis:
Hadith: Ibn `Abbas was asked whether he had joined the Prophet (ﷺ) in the `Id prayer. He said, "Yes. And I could 
not have joined him had I not been young. (The Prophet (ﷺ) came out) till he reached the mark which was 
near the house of Kathir bin As-Salt, offered the prayer, delivered the Khutba and then went towards 
the women. Bilal was accompanying him. He preached to them and advised them and ordered them to 
give alms. I saw the women putting their ornaments with their outstretched hands into Bilal's garment. 
Then the Prophet (ﷺ) along with Bilal returned home.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 977

Hadith Narrated by:  Narrated Ibn Juraij:
Hadith: `Ata' told me that he had heard Jabir bin `Abdullah saying, "The Prophet (ﷺ) stood up to offer the prayer of the `Id ul Fitr. He first offered the prayer and then delivered the Khutba. After finishing it he got down (from the pulpit) and went towards the women and advised them while he was leaning on Bilal's hand. Bilal was spreading out his garment where the women were putting their alms." I asked `Ata' whether it was the Zakat of `Id ul Fitr. He said, "No, it was just alms given at that time. Some lady put her finger ring and the others would do the same." I said, (to `Ata'), "Do you think that it is incumbent upon the Imam to give advice to the women (on `Id day)?" He said, "No doubt, it is incumbent upon the Imams to do so and why should they not do so?"

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 978

Hadith Narrated by: 
Al-Hasan bin Muslim told me that
Ibn `Abbas had said, "I joined the Prophet, Abu Bakr, `Umar and `Uthman in the `Id ul Fitr prayers. They used to offer the prayer before the Khutba and then they used to deliver the Khutba afterwards. Once the Prophet (ﷺ) I came out (for the `Id prayer) as if I were just observing him waving to the people to sit down. He, then accompanied by Bilal, came crossing the rows till he reached the women. He recited the following verse:
Hadith: 'O Prophet! When the believing women come to you to take the oath of fealty to you . . . (to the end of the verse) (60.12).' After finishing the recitation he said, "O ladies! Are you fulfilling your covenant?" None except one woman said, "Yes." Hasan did not know who was that woman. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Then give alms." Bilal spread his garment and said, "Keep on giving alms. Let my father and mother sacrifice their lives for you (ladies)." So the ladies kept on putting their Fatkhs (big rings) and other kinds of rings in Bilal's garment." `Abdur-Razaq said, " 'Fatkhs' is a big ring which used to be worn in the (Pre-Islamic) period of ignorance.

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 979

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aiyub:
Hadith: Hafsa bint Seereen said, "On Id we used to forbid our girls to go out for `Id prayer. A lady came and 
stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf and I went to her. She said, 'The husband of my sister took part in 
twelve holy battles along with the Prophet (ﷺ) and my sister was with her husband in six of them. My 
sister said that they used to nurse the sick and treat the wounded. Once she asked, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! 
If a woman has no veil, is there any harm if she does not come out (on `Id day)?' The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 
'Her companion should let her share her veil with her, and the women should participate in the good 
deeds and in the religious gatherings of the believers.' " Hafsa added, "When Um-`Atiya came, I went 
to her and asked her, 'Did you hear anything about so-and-so?' Um-`Atiya said, 'Yes, let my father be 
sacrificed for the Prophet (p.b.u.h). (And whenever she mentioned the name of the Prophet (ﷺ) she always 
used to say, 'Let my father be' sacrificed for him). He said, 'Virgin mature girls staying often screened 
(or said, 'Mature girls and virgins staying often screened--Aiyub is not sure as which was right) and 
menstruating women should come out (on the `Id day). But the menstruating women should keep 
away from the Musalla. And all the women should participate in the good deeds and in the religious 
gatherings of the believers'." Hafsa said, "On that I said to Um-`Atiya, 'Also those who are 
menstruating?' " Um-`Atiya replied, "Yes. Do they not present themselves at `Arafat and elsewhere?".
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 980

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Um-`Atiya:
Hadith: We were ordered to go out (for `Id) and also to take along with us the menstruating women, mature 
girls and virgins staying in seclusion. (Ibn `Aun said, "Or mature virgins staying in seclusion)." The 
menstruating women could present themselves at the religious gathering and invocation of Muslims 
but should keep away from their Musalla.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 981

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to Nahr or slaughter sacrifices at the Musalla (on `Id-ul-Adha).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 982

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Al-Bara' bin `Azib:
Hadith: On the day of Nahr Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) delivered the Khutba after the `Id prayer and said, "Anyone who 
prayed like us and slaughtered the sacrifice like we did then he acted according to our (Nusuk) 
tradition of sacrificing, and whoever slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer, then that was just 
mutton (i.e. not sacrifice)." Abu Burda bin Naiyar stood up and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! By Allah, I 
slaughtered my sacrifice before I offered the (Id) prayer and thought that today was the day of eating 
and drinking (nonalcoholic drinks) and so I made haste (in slaughtering) and ate and also fed my 
family and neighbors." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "That was just mutton (not a sacrifice)." Then Abu Burda 
said, "I have a young she-goat and no doubt, it is better than two sheep. Will that be sufficient as a 
sacrifice for me?" The Prophet (ﷺ) replied, "Yes. But it will not be sufficient for anyone else (as a 
sacrifice), after you."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 983

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) offered the prayer on the day of Nahr and then delivered the Khutba and ordered that 
whoever had slaughtered his sacrifice before the prayer should repeat it, that is, should slaughter 
another sacrifice. Then a person from the Ansar stood up and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! because of my 
neighbors (he described them as being very needy or poor) I slaughtered before the prayer. I have a 
young she-goat which, in my opinion, is better than two sheep." The Prophet (ﷺ) gave him the permission 
for slaughtering it as a sacrifice.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 984

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jundab:
Hadith: On the day of Nahr the Prophet (ﷺ) offered the prayer and delivered the Khutba and then slaughtered the 
sacrifice and said, "Anybody who slaughtered (his sacrifice) before the prayer should slaughter 
another animal in lieu of it, and the one who has not yet slaughtered should slaughter the sacrifice 
mentioning Allah's name on it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 985

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
Hadith: On the Day of `Id the Prophet (ﷺ) used to return (after offering the `Id prayer) through a way different 
from that by which he went.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 986

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Urwa on the authority of `Aisha:
Hadith: On the days of Mina, (11th, 12th, and 13th of Dhul-Hijjah) Abu Bakr came to her while two young 
girls were beating the tambourine and the Prophet (ﷺ) was lying covered with his clothes. Abu Bakr 
scolded them and the Prophet (ﷺ) uncovered his face and said to Abu Bakr, "Leave them, for these days 
are the days of `Id and the days of Mina." `Aisha further said, "Once the Prophet (ﷺ) was screening me 
and I was watching the display of black slaves in the Mosque and (`Umar) scolded them. The Prophet (ﷺ) 
said, 'Leave them. O Bani Arfida! (carry on), you are safe (protected)'."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 987, 988

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) went out and offered a two rak`at prayer on the Day of `Id ul Fitr and did not offer any 
other prayer before or after it and at that time Bilal was accompanying him.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 989

Hadith Narrated by: 

     Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: 

     Once a person asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (ﷺ) about the night prayer. Allah's 
     Apostle (ﷺ) replied, "The night prayer is offered as two Rak`at followed by
     two Rak`at and so on and if anyone is afraid of the approaching dawn 
     (Fajr prayer) he should pray one Rak`ah and this will be a Witr for all 
     the Rak`at which he has prayed before."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 990

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: 
Nafi` told that `Abdullah bin 
     `Umar used to say Taslim between (the first) two Rak`at and (the third)
     odd one in the Witr prayer, when he wanted to attend to a certain 
     matter (during that interval between the Rak`at). 

Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 991

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: Once I passed the night in the house of Maimuna (his aunt). I slept across the bed while Allah's 
Apostle and his wife slept length-wise. The Prophet (ﷺ) slept till midnight or nearly so and woke up 
rubbing his face and recited ten verses from Surat "Al-`Imran." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) went towards a leather 
skin and performed ablution in the most perfect way and then stood for the prayer. I did the same and 
stood beside him. The Prophet (ﷺ) put his right hand on my head, twisted my ear and then prayed two 
rak`at five times and then ended his prayer with witr. He laid down till the Mu'adh-dhin came then he 
stood up and offered two rak`at (Sunnah of Fajr prayer) and then went out and offered the Fajr prayer. 
(See Hadith 183)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 992

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `A'isha:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Night prayer is offered as two rak`at followed by two rak`at and so on, and if you 
want to finish it, pray only one rak`a which will be witr for all the previous rak`at." Al-Qasim said, 
"Since we attained the age of puberty we have seen some people offering a three-rak`at prayer as witr 
and all that is permissible. I hope there will be no harm in it."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 993

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Seereen:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to pray eleven rak`at at night and that was his night prayer and each of his 
prostrations lasted for a period enough for one of you to recite fifty verses before Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
raised his head. He also used to pray two rak`at (Sunnah) before the (compulsory) Fajr prayer and then 
lie down on his right side till the Mu'adh-dhin came to him for the prayer.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 994

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Aisha:
Hadith: I asked Ibn `Umar, "What is your opinion about the two rak`at before the Fajr (compulsory) prayer, as 
to prolonging the recitation in them?" He said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) used to pray at night two rak`at 
followed by two and so on, and end the prayer by one rak`ah witr. He used to offer two rak`at before 
the Fajr prayer immediately after the Adhan." (Hammad, the sub-narrator said, "That meant (that he 
prayed) quickly.)"
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 995

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `A'isha:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) offered witr prayer at different nights at various hours extending (from the `Isha' 
prayer) up to the last hour of the night.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 996

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer his night prayer while I was sleeping across in his bed. Whenever 
he intended to offer the witr prayer, he used to wake me up and I would offer the witr prayer too.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 997

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sa`id bin Yasar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Make witr as your last prayer at night."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 998

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: I was going to Mecca in the company of `Abdullah bin `Umar and when I apprehended the 
approaching dawn, I dismounted and offered the witr prayer and then joined him. `Abdullah bin 
`Umar said, "Where have you been?" I replied, "I apprehended the approaching dawn so I dismounted 
and prayed the witr prayer." `Abdullah said, "Isn't it sufficient for you to follow the good example of 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)?" I replied, "Yes, by Allah." He said, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) used to pray witr on the back of 
the camel (while on a journey)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 999

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Muhammad bin Seereen:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) used to offer (Nawafil) prayers on his Rahila (mount) facing its direction by signals, but 
not the compulsory prayer. He also used to pray witr on his (mount) Rahila.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1000

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Asim:
Hadith: Anas was asked, "Did the Prophet (ﷺ) recite Qunut in the Fajr prayer?" Anas replied in the affirmative. He 
was further asked, "Did he recite Qunut before bowing?" Anas replied, "He recited Qunut after 
bowing for some time (for one month)."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1001

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: I asked Anas bin Malik about the Qunut. Anas replied, "Definitely it was (recited)". I asked, "Before 
bowing or after it?" Anas replied, "Before bowing." I added, "So and so has told me that you had 
informed him that it had been after bowing." Anas said, "He told an untruth (i.e. "was mistaken," 
according to the Hijazi dialect). Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) recited Qunut after bowing for a period of one 
month." Anas added, "The Prophet (ﷺ) sent about seventy men (who knew the Qur'an by heart) towards 
the pagans (of Najd) who were less than they in number and there was a peace treaty between them 
and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (but the Pagans broke the treaty and killed the seventy men). So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) 
recited Qunut for a period of one month asking Allah to punish them."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1002

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) recited Qunut for one month (in the Fajr prayer) asking Allah to punish the tribes of Ral 
and Dhakwan.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1003

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abbad bin Tamim's uncle:
Hadith: The Prophet (p.b.u.h) went out to offer the Istisqa' prayer and turned (and put on) his cloak inside out.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1005

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira;:
Hadith: Whenever the Prophet (p.b.u.h) lifted his head from the bowing in the last rak`a he used to say: "O 
Allah! Save `Aiyash bin Abi Rabi`a. O Allah! Save Salama bin Hisham. O Allah! Save Walid bin 
Walid. O Allah! Save the weak faithful believers. O Allah! Be hard on the tribes of Mudar and send 
(famine) years on them like the famine years of (Prophet) Joseph ." The Prophet (ﷺ) further said, "Allah 
forgive the tribes of Ghifar and save the tribes of Aslam." Abu Az-Zinad (a sub-narrator) said, "The 
Qunut used to be recited by the Prophet (ﷺ) in the Fajr prayer."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1006

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Masruq:
Hadith: We were with `Abdullah and he said, "When the Prophet (ﷺ) saw the refusal of the people to accept Islam 
he said, "O Allah! Send (famine) years on them for (seven years) like the seven years (of famine 
during the time) of (Prophet) Joseph." So famine overtook them for one year and destroyed every kind 
of life to such an extent that the people started eating hides, carcasses and rotten dead animals. 
Whenever one of them looked towards the sky, he would (imagine himself to) see smoke because of 
hunger. So Abu Sufyan went to the Prophet (ﷺ) and said, "O Muhammad! You order people to obey Allah 
and to keep good relations with kith and kin. No doubt the people of your tribe are dying, so please 
pray to Allah for them." So Allah revealed: "Then watch you For the day that The sky will bring forth 
a kind Of smoke Plainly visible ... Verily! You will return (to disbelief) On the day when We shall 
seize You with a mighty grasp. (44.10-16) Ibn Mas`ud added, "Al-Batsha (i.e. grasp) happened in the 
battle of Badr and no doubt smoke, Al-Batsha, Al-Lizam, and the verse of Surat Ar-Rum have all 
passed .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1007

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Dinar:
Hadith: My father said, "I heard Ibn `Umar reciting the poetic verses of Abu Talib: And a white (person) (i.e. 
the Prophet) who is requested to pray for rain and who takes care of the orphans and is the guardian of 
widows." Salim's father (Ibn `Umar) said, "The following poetic verse occurred to my mind while I 
was looking at the face of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) while he was praying for rain. He did not get down till 
the rain water flowed profusely from every roof-gutter: And a white (person) who is requested to pray 
for rain and who takes care of the orphans and is the guardian of widows . . . And these were the 
words of Abu Talib."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1008, 1009

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Whenever drought threatened them, `Umar bin Al-Khattab, used to ask Al-Abbas bin `Abdul Muttalib 
to invoke Allah for rain. He used to say, "O Allah! We used to ask our Prophet to invoke You for rain, 
and You would bless us with rain, and now we ask his uncle to invoke You for rain. O Allah ! Bless 
us with rain."(1) And so it would rain.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1010

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Zaid:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) turned his cloak inside out on Istisqa.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1011

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Zaid:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) went towards the Musalla and invoked Allah for rain. He faced the Qibla and wore his 
cloak inside out, and offered two rak`at.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1012

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sharik bin `Abdullah bin Abi Namir:
Hadith: I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "On a Friday a person entered the main Mosque through the gate 
facing the pulpit while Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was delivering the Khutba. The man stood in front of Allah's 
Apostle and said, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut off; so please pray 
to Allah for rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! 
Bless us with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain!' " Anas added, "By Allah, 
we could not see any trace of cloud in the sky and there was no building or a house between us and 
(the mountains of) Sila." Anas added, "A heavy cloud like a shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Sila' 
Mountain). When it came in the middle of the sky, it spread and then rained." Anas further said, "By 
Allah! We could not see the sun for a week. Next Friday a person entered through the same gate and 
at that time Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was delivering the Friday's Khutba. The man stood in front of him and 
said, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut off, please pray to Allah to 
withhold rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Round about 
us and not on us. O Allah! On the plateaus, on the mountains, on the hills, in the valleys and on the 
places where trees grow.' So the rain stopped and we came out walking in the sun." Sharik asked Anas 
whether it was the same person who had asked for the rain (the last Friday). Anas replied that he did 
not know.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1013

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Sharik:
Hadith: Anas bin Malik said, "A person entered the Mosque on a Friday through the gate facing the Daril- 
Qada' and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was standing delivering the Khutba (sermon). The man stood in front of 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), livestock are dying and the roads are cut off; please pray 
to Allah for rain.' So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Bless us with 
rain. O Allah! Bless us with rain. O Allah! Bless us with rain!" Anas added, "By Allah, there were no 
clouds in the sky and there was no house or building between us and the mountain of Sila'. Then a big 
cloud like a shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Silas Mountain) and when it came in the middle of the 
sky, it spread and then rained. By Allah! We could not see the sun for a week. The next Friday, a 
person entered through the same gate and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was delivering the Friday Khutba and the 
man stood in front of him and said, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut 
off; Please pray to Allah to withhold rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) raised both his hands and 
said, 'O Allah! Round about us and not on us. O Allah!' On the plateaus, on the mountains, on the 
hills, in the valleys and on the places where trees grow.' " Anas added, "The rain stopped and we came 
out, walking in the sun." Sharik asked Anas whether it was the same person who had asked for rain 
the previous Friday. Anas replied that he did not know.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1014

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Qatada:
Hadith: Anas I said, "While Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) was delivering the Friday Khutba (sermon) a man came 
and said, 'O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Rain is scarce; please ask Allah to bless us with rain.' So he invoked 
Allah for it, and it rained so much that we could hardly reach our homes and it continued raining till 
the next Friday." Anas further said, "Then the same or some other person stood up and said, 'O Allah's 
Apostle! Invoke Allah to withhold the rain.' On that, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I said, 'O Allah! Round about us 
and not on us.' " Anas added, "I saw the clouds dispersing right and left and it continued to rain but 
not over Medina."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1015

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: A man came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and said, "Livestock are destroyed and the roads are cut off." So 
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) invoked Allah for rain and it rained from that Friday till the next Friday. The same 
person came again and said, "Houses have collapsed, roads are cut off, and the livestock are 
destroyed. Please pray to Allah to withhold the rain." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (stood up and) said, "O Allah! 
(Let it rain) on the plateaus, on the hills, in the valleys and over the places where trees grow." So the 
clouds cleared away from Medina as clothes are taken off .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1016

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: A man came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Livestock are destroyed and the roads 
are cut off. So please invoke Allah." So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) prayed and it rained from that Friday to the 
next Friday. Then he came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Houses have collapsed, 
roads are cut off and the livestock are destroyed." So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) prayed, "O Allah! (Let 
it rain) on the tops of mountains, on the plateaus, in the valleys and over the places where trees grow." 
So the clouds cleared away from Medina as clothes are taken off.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1017

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: I p man complained to the Prophet (ﷺ) about the destruction of livestock and property and the hunger of 
the offspring. So he invoked (Allah for rain. The narrator (Anas) did not mention that the Prophet (ﷺ) had 
worn his cloak inside out or faced the Qibla.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1018

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: A man came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! Livestock are destroyed and the roads 
are cut off; so please invoke Allah." So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) prayed for rain and it rained from that Friday 
till the next Friday. Then a man came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! The 
houses have collapsed, roads are cut off and the livestock are destroyed." So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said, "O 
Allah ! (Let it rain) on the tops of the mountains, on the plateaus, in the valleys and over the places 
where trees grow." So the clouds cleared away from Medina as clothes are taken off.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1019

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Masruq:
Hadith: One day I went to Ibn Mas`ud who said, "When Quraish delayed in embracing Islam, the Prophet (ﷺ) I 
invoked Allah to curse them, so they were afflicted with a (famine) year because of which many of 
them died and they ate the carcasses and Abu Sufyan came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and said, 'O Muhammad! 
You came to order people to keep good relation with kith and kin and your nation is being destroyed, 
so invoke Allah I ? So the Prophet (ﷺ) I recited the Holy verses of Sirat-Ad-Dukhan: 'Then watch you For 
the day that The sky will Bring forth a kind Of smoke Plainly visible.' (44.10) When the famine was 
taken off, the people renegade once again as nonbelievers. The statement of Allah, (in Sura "Ad- 
Dukhan"-44) refers to that: 'On the day when We shall seize You with a mighty grasp.' (44.16) And 
that was what happened on the day of the battle of Badr." Asbath added on the authority of Mansur, 
"Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) prayed for them and it rained heavily for seven days. So the people complained of the 
excessive rain. The Prophet (ﷺ) said, 'O Allah! (Let it rain) around us and not on us.' So the clouds 
dispersed over his head and it rained over the surroundings."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1020

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) I was delivering the Khutba (sermon) on a Friday when the people stood up, shouted 
and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! There is no rain (drought), the trees have dried and the livestock are 
destroyed; Please pray to Allah for rain." So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said twice, "O Allah! Bless us with rain." 
By Allah, there was no trace of cloud in the sky and suddenly the sky became overcast with clouds 
and it started raining. The Prophet (ﷺ) came down the pulpit and offered the prayer. When he came back 
from the prayer (to his house) it was raining and it rained continuously till the next Friday. When the 
Prophet started delivering the Friday Khutba (sermon), the people started shouting and said to him, 
"The houses have collapsed and the roads are cut off; so please pray to Allah to withhold the rain." So 
the Prophet (ﷺ) smiled and said, "O Allah! Round about us and not on us." So the sky became clear over 
Medina but it kept on raining over the outskirts (of Medina) and not a single drop of rain fell over 
Median. I looked towards the sky which was as bright and clear as a crown.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1021

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abbad bin Tamim:
Hadith: Narrated 'Abdullah bin Yazid Al-Ansari that he went out with Al-Bara' bin 'Azib, and Zaid bin Arqam and invoked for rain. He ('Abdullah bin Yazid) stood up but not on a pulpit and invoked Allah for rain and then offered two Rak'a prayers with loud recitation without pronouncing Adhan or Iqama. Abu Ishaq said that 'Adbullah bin Yazid had seen the Prophet (ﷺ) (doing the same)
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1022

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abbad bin Tamim:
Hadith: that his uncle (who was one of the companions of the Prophet) had told him, "The Prophet (ﷺ) went out 
with the people to invoke Allah for rain for them. He stood up and invoked Allah for rain, then faced 
the Qibla and turned his cloak (inside out) and it rained."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1023

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abbad bin Tamim from his uncle:
Hadith: from his uncle who said, "The Prophet (ﷺ) went out to invoke Allah for rain. He faced the Qibla invoking 
Allah. He turned over his cloak (inside out) and then offered two rak`at and recited the Qur'an aloud in 
them."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1024

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abbad bin Tamim from his uncle who said:
Hadith: "I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) on the day when he went out to offer the Istisqa' prayer. He turned his back 
towards the people and faced the Qibla and asked Allah for rain. Then he turned his cloak inside out 
and led us in a two rak`at prayer and recited the Qur'an aloud in them."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1025

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abbad bin Tamim from his uncle who said:
Hadith: "The Prophet (ﷺ) invoked Allah for rain and offered a two rak`at prayer and he put his cloak inside out."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1026

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated `Abdullah bin Zaid Al-Ansari:
Hadith: "The Prophet (ﷺ) went out to the Musalla to offer the Istisqa' prayer, faced the Qibla and offered a two rak`at prayer and turned his cloak inside out." Narrated Abu Bakr, "The Prophet (ﷺ) put the right side of 
his cloak on his left side."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1027

Hadith Narrated by: Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) went out towards the Musalla in order to offer the Istisqa' prayer and when he intended 
to invoke (Allah) or started invoking, he faced the Qibla and turned his cloak inside out.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1028

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: A bedouin came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) on a Friday  and said, "O Allah's Messenger ! The livestock, the offspring, and the people have perished." So, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) raised both his hands invoking Allah (for rain) and the people too raised their hands with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) invoking Allah (for rain). We had not left the mosque when it started raining. It rained till the next Friday when the same man came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said, "O Allah's Messenger! The travelers are compelled to postpone their journeys (because of excessive rain) and the roads are overflowed."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1029

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Aisha:
Hadith: The narrator Anas added that the Prophet (ﷺ) raised his hands (during the invocation) to such an extent that the whiteness of his armpits was visible.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1030

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) never raised his hands for any invocation except for that of Istisqa' and he used to raise 
them so much that the whiteness of his armpits became visible. (Note: It may be that Anas did not see 
the Prophet (ﷺ) raising his hands, but it is narrated that the Prophet (ﷺ) used to raise his hands for invocations 
other than Istisqa. See Hadith No. 807 & 808 and also see Hadith No. 612, Vol. 5).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1031

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Anas:
Hadith: Whenever Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saw the rain, he used to say, "O Allah! Let it be a strong fruitful rain."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1032

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Abbas:
Hadith: In the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) (p.b.u.h) the people were afflicted with a (famine) year. While the 
Prophet was delivering the Khutba (sermon) on the pulpit on a Friday, a Bedouin stood up and said, 
"O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! The livestock are dying and the families (offspring) are hungry: please pray to 
Allah to bless us with rain." Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) raised both his hands towards the sky and at that time 
there was not a trace of cloud in they sky. Then the clouds started gathering like mountains. Before he 
got down from the pulpit I saw rainwater trickling down his beard. It rained that day, the next day, the 
third day, the fourth day and till the next Friday, when the same Bedouin or some other person stood 
up (during the Friday Khutba) and said, "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! The houses have collapsed and the 
livestock are drowned. Please invoke Allah for us." So Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) raised both his hands and said, 
"O Allah! Around us and not on us." Whichever side the Prophet (ﷺ) directed his hand, the clouds 
dispersed from there till a hole (in the clouds) was formed over Medina. The valley of Qanat remained 
flowing (with water) for one month and none, came from outside who didn't talk about the abundant 
rain.
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1033

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Hadith: Whenever a strong wind blew, anxiety appeared on the face of the Prophet (fearing that wind might be 
a sign of Allah's wrath).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1034

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "I was granted victory with As-Saba and the nation of 'Ad was destroyed by Ad- 
Dabur (westerly wind) .
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1035

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
Hadith: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The Hour (Last Day) will not be established until (religious) knowledge will be 
taken away (by the death of religious learned men), earthquakes will be very frequent, time will pass 
quickly, afflictions will appear, murders will increase and money will overflow amongst you." (See 
Hadith No. 85 Vol 1).
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1036

Hadith Narrated by: 
Narrated Ibn `Umar:
Hadith: (The Prophet) said, "O Allah! Bless our Sham and our Yemen." People said, "Our Najd as well." The 
Prophet again said, "O Allah! Bless our Sham and Yemen." They said again, "Our Najd as well." On 
that the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "There will appear earthquakes and afflictions, and from there will come out the 
side of the head of Satan."
Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari 1037

